From the center of Finland r.p. Parliamentary elections 2015
The center's election program
ACCEPTANCE OF RESPONSIBILITY
For health - responsibility for your own well-being
We have a great responsibility for our own well-being and that of our loved ones.
We influence these things with our lifestyles and other choices.
Society's task is to create the conditions for people to take responsibility for themselves.
For example, self-care and rehabilitation must be reformed to support people's health, coping and working.
Sports and cultural services support well-being and health.
Public funds must be used to support self-directed hobby opportunities that reach as many population groups as possible.
For children, young people and the needy, sufficient free and affordable low-threshold cultural and sports opportunities must be ensured, including opportunities to try new hobbies.
The mobility needs of the elderly must be taken care of.
Finland needs national attitude talks on the use of alcohol.
The costs to society caused by alcohol must be reduced.
We have to move from a drunken drinking culture towards moderation.
The effectiveness of substance abuse care and treatment must be improved.
Time for loved ones, space for volunteer work
People take responsibility for their loved ones by giving them their time and everyday help.
It is invaluable not only from a human perspective, but also from the point of view of our national economy.
Many Finns also work in organizations and other voluntary work.
The basic conditions for this activity, especially long-term financing, must be secured.
The norms and bureaucracy burdening clubs and organizations must be dismantled.
Reimbursement of travel expenses and provision of food to volunteers must be allowed, for example.
More and more public spaces and equipment must be made available to volunteers.
The expertise of volunteers must be utilized better than at present.
They need to be heard more often already in the preparation phase of things
and to be involved in the renewal, planning and production of services.
A clean environment for posterity
Climate change must be stopped.
All countries must together set the framework and rules of the game for emissions and climate efforts,
and reduce fossil oil use by a third by the 2030s.
The use of coal must be stopped in Finland.
The carbon-free Helsinki 2025 project must be launched.
The use of renewables will be increased by changing the focus of taxation and simplifying standardization.
Finland must look for practical solutions to global challenges, climate change and food, water and energy shortages.
Solving them will also create new jobs in the bioeconomy and clean technology companies, as well as in the food industry.
Biodiversity must be protected first of all with methods based on voluntariness, such as Southern Finland's forest protection program Metso.
Finland, the other countries bordering the Baltic Sea and the EU must jointly bear their responsibility for saving our common sea.
For example, enhancing the nutrient cycle and related technical solutions will improve the condition of both the Baltic Sea and inland waters
and can at the same time create new jobs in our country.
People must be able to live according to their wishes and life situations, where and how they want.
Construction and housing need their own standards.
Regulations that make construction difficult must be gutted, both in cities and in rural areas.
A national attitude movement is needed to prevent moisture and mold problems.
It means better know-how and responsibility both in ordering buildings, planning, monitoring, construction itself as well as in the use of facilities.
Less standards, more trust
In Finland, coal blowing is needed.
The safety nets of society and neighboring communities must function.
In a healthy society, people are helped, people are treated fairly, they have the opportunity to participate, and citizens follow the jointly agreed rules of the game.
Instead of excessive norms, Finns need more mutual trust.
For necessary reforms,
for improving competitiveness
and to increase employment, a social contract is needed - exceptionally strong and committed cooperation between the government, parliament, labor market organizations, companies and other actors.
The state needs to increase trust above all with consistent and long-term decision-making.
The management system of the public sector must be reformed, starting with the work of the Government.
The government's accounting practice must be changed.
The public sector needs to change from a brake to an enabler - of trying
and to encourage work.
Unnecessary standardization must be dismantled.
Clear time limits are needed for processing permits, complaints and other issues.
The smoothness of public administration must be made a competitive advantage for Finland.
ECONOMIC GROWTH
200,000 new jobs
The vicious cycle of our economy must be broken.
We need 200,000 new jobs for the private sector in ten years.
It requires the creation of growth, especially for new industries such as the bio and creative economy.
Our traditional industries must be renewed and strengthened.
The social contract must improve the competitiveness of our companies.
Taxation must encourage entrepreneurship, risk-taking
and to work.
Regulation that restricts activity and competition must be dismantled.
The assessment of the need for labor coming from outside the EEA area must be removed.
The focus of transport policy that supports business activities and citizens' everyday life must be shifted from new expensive projects to the maintenance and upkeep of roads, railways and other thoroughfares.
Working careers must be extended.
In addition to the pension solution
we need increasingly faster graduation for working life,
maintenance and rehabilitation of work ability,
utilization of the skills of people who are able to work part-time
and even better well-being at work.
The labor market must be reformed so that, at the same time, employee safety is strengthened
and more flexibility for the employer.
Social security must be developed in such a way that it secures a person's basic income
and at the same time encourages the acceptance of work.
The functionality of basic income must be tested and developed through regional experiments.
We need to find ways to speed up investments
and to increase the share of product development and research activities in the gross national product closer to the four percent target.
Companies can be encouraged to do this by introducing an application of the undistributed profit reservation system instead of the Estonian tax model.
Education and competence as a cornerstone
Finland must be made a model country of creativity, competence and new learning environments.
Equal basic education
and the accessibility of education throughout the country must be secured.
The number of school dropouts must be reduced.
The child's right to early childhood education must be promoted.
Learning methods in basic education
and the structure of the school day must be reformed.
Mobile learning environments
and the use of game-like learning must be increased.
The goal is to set an hour of exercise during the school day.
It must be possible to attend high school from home.
The vocational training network must be regionally comprehensive.
The duration of vocational education must be shortened, taking care to maintain students' eligibility for further studies.
Apprenticeship training for young people must be converted into a training contract.
Education bureaucracy and unnecessary standards must be eliminated.
Closer cooperation between different educational levels and forms of education must be made possible.
Experiments must be taken as part of the reform of the education system, for example distance and online teaching in high schools and the Russian language in Eastern Finland.
Education exports must be properly accelerated.
Tuition fees for students from outside the EU/EEA must be made possible.
From the state's property, speed to the whole of Finland
State property should not be sold to cover the deficit and debt of the state economy.
It has to create new entrepreneurship
and new jobs.
Access to sufficient financing is a significant bottleneck for the growth of companies.
One solution to this is a growth fund.
The government's balance sheet, i.e. assets, must be better put to work.
The center would use a small part, for example 1.5 billion of the state's company assets of about 30 billion, over the next 10 years to stimulate the growth of companies.
The growth fund would be implemented through current operators, such as Suomen Teollisuussijoitus Oy, Finnvera Oyj, and private operators, to destinations that meet the criteria for profitable business operations, so that private money always goes ahead.
However, the established players mentioned above are in dire need of new tools and better resources to finance the growth of companies.
Public money should be allocated to funding bottlenecks to supplement private funding.
A new instrument, Valtion Infra Oy, is needed to finance large transport projects.
Growth from the bioeconomy and digitization
Bioeconomy can be made into a billion-dollar success story for the whole of Finland.
In addition to traditional fields, renewable natural resources can be utilized in the production of, for example, bioplastics, new types of packaging and medicines.
Black carbon energy policy must be brought down by increasing domestic and renewable energy.
The renewable share of the energy we use must be increased from 32 percent to more than 60 percent in the next 20 years.
Wood construction must be increased
and zoning to promote the use of wood also in apartment building and public construction.
Finland's food imports in euros are three times compared to our exports.
This food balance needs to be corrected with a billion euros by strengthening the appreciation of our clean foods, increasing the processing value and marketing our products even better.
The EU's food policy must ensure consumers' right to comprehensive food origin labels and product traceability.
Primary producers must be guaranteed a fair share in the income distribution of the food chain.
The public sector must ensure the conditions for the development of digital services.
Citizens must be able to control the information stored and used by themselves
and handle all official dealings electronically.
A fast and affordable broadband connection must be secured for all citizens and companies.
Digitization and putting information systems in order can increase the productivity of the public sector, free up workers' time to meet customers and increase work well-being.
CARE
Caring for relatives and caring for the elderly
Caregivers take care of their loved ones who are elderly, disabled or otherwise need constant help.
Currently, caregivers living in different parts of Finland are in an unequal position.
The level of support varies depending on the municipality.
Therefore, uniform national criteria must be drawn up for family care
and the financial support of caregivers must be transferred to Kela's responsibility.
Sufficient support services must also be secured for caregivers.
Everyone has the right to a good and dignified old age.
It includes the right to self-determination, inclusion and security.
Every elderly person must receive support and services according to their needs.
Family therapy must be used more and more not only for children and young people in foster care, but also for the elderly, people with intellectual disabilities, and people undergoing mental health rehabilitation.
Home services and freedom of choice back to families
Finland needs a family policy that is consistent and reduces inequality.
Families must have genuine freedom of choice in the care solutions for their children.
Forced quotas of home care for mother and father are not a viable solution.
Especially for parents of young children, better opportunities for flexible working time solutions must be created.
Municipal home service needs to be increased to help families in temporary difficulties.
Let's improve the flow of information in the child's affairs between different actors.
Adequate security is provided
and competent child protection personnel.
Stop the marginalization of young people
One marginalized young person is too many.
He will pay society 1.2 million euros during his lifetime, not to mention the human suffering.
Marginalization cannot be solved with formulaic solutions such as raising the compulsory education age.
A young person at risk of being marginalized needs solutions tailored just for him.
A young person who has lost a place to study after primary school must ultimately be picked up from home and a suitable training or training path for working life must be drawn up for him.
It is necessary to implement operating models of traveling side by side.
In them, one adult takes responsibility for the overall well-being of the young person and does not push the young person from one corner to another.
The call-ups of the Defense Forces must be developed into future call-ups for the entire age group, including young women.
In them, in addition to the options for completing their military service, young people can go through issues related to their future with professionals from different fields and get guidance and support for their problems.
Equality for those living alone
The life situations and problems of those living alone must be taken into account better than at present in decision-making.
Their poverty must be prevented by taking care of basic security
and supporting their employment.
The needs and wishes of people living alone for affordable housing must be translated into action.
In society, such payments or forms of taxation that put people living alone in an unequal position should be avoided.
The maximum amount of the household deduction must be increased for those living alone.
One-parent families need to be supported with flexible daycare arrangements
and by developing municipal home help to support the everyday life of these families better than at present.
PUBLIC FINANCE
Taxation to encourage entrepreneurship and work
Finns' taxation is already a world record.
We can no longer tighten our overall tax rate.
Taxation must be predictable, consistent and simplified.
It must encourage work,
trying and risk-taking.
As a counterweight to the corporate tax reduction for large companies, the position of private companies and business names must be improved, for example, with a tax reduction for entrepreneurs.
The position of the self-employed must be made easier by increasing the lower limit of the VAT obligation to 10,000 euros and the relief area to 40,000 euros.
In order to strengthen the growth and employment opportunities of companies, a new reservation system must be created, which enables part of the profit to be left as a reservation in the company, so that the reservation must be liquidated, for example, within the next four years.
Risk-taking is encouraged, for example, by making it possible to deduct capital losses from other capital income.
Income source distribution is waived in corporate taxation.
A point for debt to live on
Finland needs a bold economic program.
Living in debt to the state must end in 6-7 years.
The most important thing is to get the Finnish economy on a two percent growth path by 2019 at the latest and thus secure the conditions for our well-being.
The real deficit of the national economy must be reduced below two billion euros
and the municipal budget deficit to about one billion in the next election period.
The economic program means strict spending discipline in the public sector,
improving productivity,
dismantling unnecessary regulation
and, if necessary, spending savings of 2 billion.
Major reforms such as the pension reform, other lengthening of working careers and the fight against the gray economy must be brought to the finish line with determination.
Municipal services and funding to balance
The state's municipal policy must be long-term
and trust-building.
The tasks and funding of the municipalities must be balanced.
The operating methods of municipalities must be reformed,
the norms that guide them must be dared to be dismantled
and municipalities should refrain from giving new tasks.
The free government experiment must be started.
The state share reform needs to be corrected by paying more attention than currently to municipality-specific effects and rewarding preventive work.
Municipal self-government must be defended.
We do not accept forced connections, but connections must be based on voluntariness.
The goal must be democratic regional administration
and a significantly lighter central administration than at present.
Tasks requiring regional development and competence should be put under the responsibility of the democratic provincial administration.
Sote to the finish line
Regardless of where they live, citizens must be able to see a doctor quickly and at a reasonable distance.
Health and well-being differences between population groups must be narrowed.
Social and health services must play together better than at present.
The focus must be shifted to basic services,
for health promotion
and to prevent problems.
For this reason, social security reform must be completed.
The financing of social security services must be simplified and clarified towards a single channel.
In services, customers' options for choice must be increased.
Information systems must be made functional and employees' time must be freed up to meet customers.
One compatible social security service channel must be put into use by 2019 at the latest.
FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY
The number one goal of Finland's foreign and security policy is to maintain stability in the Nordic region and the Baltic Sea region.
Finland continues an active foreign and security policy, the cornerstone of which is good relations with its neighbors,
international cooperation,
military non-alignment
and own reinforced defense based on general conscription and the defense of the entire country.
Finland is developing NATO's partnership for peace
and maintain the possibility of applying for NATO membership,
if the state leadership and the Finns through a referendum ever end up with a new basic solution.
Defense cooperation with Sweden is being intensified.
New threats, such as the fight against cyber attacks, are being invested in.
As a high-tech country, Finland can develop cyber security and privacy protection into a new growth area for itself.
Nordic cooperation must be intensified, for example, in Arctic policy and within the framework of the EU and the UN, especially in the promotion of human rights.
In international activities and development aid, the emphasis is on building peace,
human rights
and the fight against major threats to humanity, climate change, poverty and food, water and energy shortages.
Food security - securing adequate food for everyone - must be made the top goal of Finland's development policy.
The most important task of the European Union is still strengthening peace and stability on our continent and in the world.
Finland must continue its constructive, purposeful and timely influence in the EU
and to take care of our national interests arising from our special circumstances.
The Union must focus on the big issues,
stop getting into too much detail
and give Member States room to maneuver.
In the EU, cooperation between member states must be practical.
The jointly agreed rules must be followed.
Internal security must be strengthened.
The police, ambulance and rescue services must be there quickly in dangerous situations.
Care must be taken regarding the prerequisites and removal of obstacles for volunteer activities such as contract fire brigades.
In exceptional situations - such as extensive storm damage and power outages, a functional flow of information and access to help must be secured.
