<No title information>
ELECTORAL PROGRAM
FROM THE SOCIALIST PARTY
SOCIALIST PARTY ELECTORAL PROGRAM
LEGISLATIVE ELECTIONS 2015
INDEX
CHAPTER I AN AGENDA FOR THE DECADE, A PROGRAM FOR THE LEGISLATURE 7CHAPTER II TURNING THE PAGE ON AUSTERITY, RELAUNCHING THE ECONOMY AND JOBS 111. INCREASE THE AVAILABLE INCOME OF FAMILIES TO RELAUNCH THE ECONOMY 112. SOLVE THE PROBLEM OF COMPANY FINANCING 12 3. PROMOTE THE EMPLOYMENT, COMBATING PRECARIITY 14CHAPTER IIIA NEW IMPULSE FOR CONVERGENCE WITH EUROPE 191. DEFENDING AN INTELLIGENT READING OF BUDGETARY DISCIPLINE 192. A NEW IMPULSE FOR CONVERGENCE WITH EUROPE 22CHAPTER IVA STRONG, INTELLIGENT AND MODERN STATE 251. IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF DEMOCRACY 252. GOVERN BETTER, GOVERN DIFFERENTLY 263. ENSURE DEFENSE IN A WIDE TERRITORY 284. INTERNAL SECURITY AND CRIMINAL POLICY 295. SPEED UP JUSTICE 326. STRENGTHEN, SIMPLIFY AND DIGITALIZE ADMINISTRATION 347. ENSURE EFFECTIVE REGULATION Z OF MARKETS 368. VALUE THE AUTONOMY OF AUTONOMOUS REGIONS 379. DECENTRALIZATION, THE BASIS OF STATE REFORM 38CHAPTER V21 CAUSES TO MOBILIZE PORTUGAL 41A. PRIORITY TO PEOPLE 411. DEFEND THE SNS, PROMOTE HEALTH 422. COMBAT SCHOOL FAILURE, GUARANTEE 12 YEARS OF SCHOOLING 443. INVEST IN ADULT EDUCATION AND LIFELONG TRAINING 474. MODERNIZE, QUALIFY AND DIVERSIFY HIGHER EDUCATION 485 . REACTING TO THE DEMOGRAPHIC CHALLENGE 506. PROMOTING QUALITY OF LIFE 517. A NEW GENERATION OF HOUSING POLICIES 53B. VALUE OUR TERRITORY 558. SEA: A BET IN THE FUTURE 569. AFFIRM THE “INTERIOR” AS CENTRALITY IN THE IBERIAN MARKET 5910. PROMOTE TERRITORIAL COHESION AND ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY 6111. VALUE AGRICULTURAL AND FORESTRY ACTIVITY AND RURAL SPACE 64C. Priority to Innovation 6612. LEADING ENERGY TRANSITION 6713. Invest in culture, democratize access 7114. reinforce investment in science and technology, democratizing innovation 7315. Priority to innovation and internationalization of companies 75D. MORE COHESION, LESS INEQUALITIES 7816. ENSURE THE SUSTAINABILITY OF SOCIAL SECURITY 7817. BETTER FISCAL JUSTICE 8018. COMBAT POVERTY 8119. BUILD A MORE EQUAL SOCIETY 83E. A GLOBAL PORTUGAL 8520. PROMOTE THE PORTUGUESE LANGUAGE AND LUSOPHONE CITIZENSHIP 8621. CONTINUE PORTUGUESE IN PORTUGUESE COMMUNITIES 87
AN AGENDA FOR THE DECADE, A PROGRAM FOR THE LEGISLATURE
A necessary balance
June 2015. The time has come for the Portuguese to evaluate the results of the policies of the government of Passos Coelho and Paulo Portas and learn about the alternative future that the PS leads.
We understand well that the right-wing coalition wants to escape this assessment and avoids debate on alternative policies at all costs.
But this is the right time to do it.
First, the evaluation. From the outset, the entire mandate of the right-wing coalition government rests on an enormous political fraud.
In the 2011 election campaign, Passos Coelho solemnly promised not to increase taxes and not to cut salaries and pensions.
The entire problem would be solved by changing the “state's fat” and there would be no need to sacrifice people's income.
However, once in government, the right-wing coalition did exactly the opposite: it cut salaries, cut pensions, increased taxes.
Afterwards, the mandate of the right-wing coalition was ideologically controlled by a double orientation.
On the one hand, it used financial assistance and the adjustment program negotiated with the troika as a pretext to develop a policy that went far beyond what the program envisaged and that sought to change the balance of forces in Portugal, against the interests of workers, families, the middle classes and the poorest.
When the right says that there was no alternative, they know that they are missing the truth: there was already the alternative of sticking to what was agreed in the Memorandum of Understanding with the troika, which did not foresee cuts in salaries and pensions, nor an increase in the tax burden in dimension in was accomplished!
On the other hand, the government guided its action against the spirit and letter of the Constitution, punctuating its mandate with successive grossly unconstitutional decisions and persistently and unacceptable attacking the Constitutional Court.
The right-wing coalition government was not able to govern in accordance with the Constitution!
The right-wing government also failed to live up to its responsibilities in defending the national interest.
Instead of asserting the Portuguese position, it always aligned itself with interests contrary to this position, giving up, contrary to what other countries with similar financial difficulties did, to defend, in Europe, a policy that was less penalizing of the economy and the social fabric.
The results of this political fraud, this ideological fanaticism and this disregard for the national interest are visible to everyone.
Four years of the policy of “going beyond the troika”, adding to the austerity imposed in the Adjustment Program more cuts in labor and family income, public services, pensions, social benefits and investment, have led to unprecedented social devastation. precedents.
Between 2011 and 2015, the wealth generated in the country fell, investment fell, the number of unemployed people and unemployed young people increased, and 500,000 jobs were lost.
The amount paid for social benefits was reduced, as was the number of beneficiaries.
The risk of poverty has increased, particularly among children,
retention and dropout rates in basic education increased
. Inequalities have intensified.
Families saw their incomes fall and found it much more difficult to pay off loans, many losing their own homes, at the same time as they suffered the highest tax burden ever.
44 companies went bankrupt every day.
More than 350 thousand people emigrated.
New government, other policies
This path cannot be continued.
Portugal deserves different and deserves better.
The policy that consisted of increasing taxes and cutting salaries, pensions, social support and public services failed dismally.
Instead of falling, public debt, which is the main indicator of the health of public finances, increased.
And it increased a lot: between 2010 and 2014, it rose from 96 to 130% of GDP, that is, 34 percentage points more!
Compared to the volume of resources taken from the economy and people, the fall in the budget deficit was small, failing the objectives of the Adjustment Program.
In other words: the devastation caused to the Portuguese economy and society did nothing to contribute to the sustained consolidation of public finances.
This means that the country's economic and social blockages, instead of being overcome, have worsened.
Instead of overcoming its structural delays, Portugal fell further behind.
Even the indicators that improved in the meantime, the most important of which was the reduction in interest rates paid on public debt, were a consequence, not of the policy of the right-wing coalition government, nor of the troika, but rather of the new attitude of the European Central Bank. – against which, in fact, Prime Minister Passos Coelho spoke out.
And the small economic growth recorded in 2014 was largely due to the stimulation of domestic demand motivated by the decision of the Constitutional Court, which imposed the government to moderate cuts.
In other words: the few improvements did not happen because of government action, but despite – and even against – government action.
It is therefore necessary to do differently and do better: turn the page on austerity and relaunch the economy and employment.
Only in this way will we be able to stop the social regression and return to the path of progress and solidarity, only in this way will we be able to overcome the budget crisis.
But the right-wing coalition government's own political options also failed, and even more so.
It was not the troika that ordered the elimination of the “New Opportunities” adult training program,
or suspend the development of family health units and long-term care units:
it was the petty prejudice of the current government.
It was not on the advice of the troika that the government stopped Simplex, left school projects in half, disinvested in renewable energy, attacked science and scientists: it was out of pure political revanchism, in the face of national projects that it wrongly confused with the flags of previous governments.
It is not the troika's responsibility for the chaos at the opening of this school year, the resounding failure of the reform of the judicial map, the drain on human resources imposed on Social Security or the protection of minors, the violations of the principle of equality between taxpayers with the creation of lists VIP, or the degradation of hospital emergency services: the responsibility lies exclusively with the right-wing government.
The country demands credible policies, tangible improvements, and needs a horizon of hope and stability.
For all this, to do things differently, Portugal needs a new government.
Firstly, because the current government failed to fulfill its electoral commitment to the Portuguese, doing exactly the opposite of what it had promised.
Secondly, because his policy failed resoundingly.
Thirdly, what PSD and CDS have to propose is the continuation of austerity policies and, therefore, the continuation of the country's impoverishment and the weakening of its economy and social fabric.
Portugal demands a new government majority that governs in the interests of the majority of Portuguese people.
Only with a new government and a new parliamentary majority can Portugal benefit from different and better policies.
This is the purpose of the Socialist Party: to politically represent this great social majority and fulfill its duty to all Portuguese people, presenting them with an alternative, embodied in a new program, a new leadership and a new team.
Rigor and participation in the construction of the Government Program
New policies require a different attitude towards national challenges.
It is necessary to look to the future, so that medium-term objectives capable of guiding consistent and lasting political action are defined.
Be clear about the fundamental options, valuing our resources, that is, the people, the territory, the Portuguese language and the Portuguese-speaking space, Portugal's position in the world;
modernizing economic activity and the State;
investing in the future through science and culture;
reinforcing social cohesion through health and social security and solidarity policies.
In the short term, it is necessary to define an urgent program in the critical areas of relaunching the economy and combating unemployment and poverty.
And mobilize the entire Portuguese society on this basis, towards a future of qualification and progress, and
so that a strategic social consultation agreement and broad platforms of political understanding are built, so that we can overcome problems together and seize the opportunities of the next decade together.
This overall vision was proposed in the “Agenda for the Decade”, the strategic guidance document approved last November, at the PS Congress.
It serves as a reference for the PS Electoral Program for the period from 2015 to 2019.
And it was based on this that the PS asked a group of renowned economists to develop a macroeconomic scenario.
The scenario should include and test policy measures that, respecting the national commitment to the Eurozone and, therefore, the rules of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), would allow the economy to be relaunched and job creation to be seriously advanced. is, sustainably, the consolidation of public finances.
The document “A Decade for Portugal”, publicly presented in April 2015, contains this exercise.
It indisputably demonstrates the compatibility of economic policy
and social with concern for the rigor and sustainability of public accounts.
In fact, based on the European Commission's projections as a base scenario, the document shows how a policy of replacing family income, tax and contributory relief for consumers, companies and workers and relaunching investment, accelerating implementation of community funds and giving priority to technological incorporation and modernization, not only allows for greater growth in product and employment and a greater reduction in unemployment,
how it guarantees better results on the budgetary front, whether in terms of deficit or in terms of public debt.
The elaboration and presentation of the macroeconomic scenario for 2015-2019 changed the political debate in Portugal.
Due to the seriousness of the process, which called for qualified academic participation to inform political ideas and proposals.
For transparency, offering all interested parties a set of data and calculations that allows testing the relevance and scope of policy measures.
And for its usefulness, creating a tool applicable to other areas and programmatic measures.
But, above all, what the exercise carried out shows is that, even within the very restrictive framework of current European budgetary rules, it is possible to do something different from the “austeritarianism” of the right-wing coalition government and its attitude of “going beyond the troika”, refusing further income cuts and a greater tax burden on families and employment, and focusing on well-calibrated stimuli for the economic and business fabric.
It is possible to promote growth and employment, while ensuring the rigor and sustainability of public finances.
The alternative is not only necessary; the alternative is possible.
It is in our hands to choose and implement the alternative.
Europe, a space for defending national interests
As a Member State of the European Union, Portugal has several of its fundamental political options associated with decisions that are now taken by the Union as a whole.
What is an inherent constraint, in particular, in participating in the Economic and Monetary Union and sharing a common currency also represents a huge advantage.
But, to capitalize on this advantage, the Portuguese authorities' attitude must be active and committed, making themselves heard in Brussels, defending our own interests in Brussels and also contributing to change at European level in favor of the economy, investment and of employment.
This requires determination, autonomy and the ability to identify allies and build alliances: that is, exactly the opposite of what the right-wing coalition government did, which acted more as a steward of other people's interests and orders than as a defender of national interests and desires. .
From the PS's point of view, Europe and, within it, the Eurozone, are Portugal's reference space.
That's where we want to be, and that's where we can develop.
Contrary to what the political forces that, more or less explicitly, defend, or at least admit, leaving the euro think, the PS understands, on the contrary, that this would mean a serious setback for our country.
It is within Europe and with Europe that challenges must be overcome – both the many challenges that we share with the other Member States, and the challenges that are particular to us.
It is safer to overcome them, however, with a substantial change in European policy and, in particular, cohesion policy.
The countries that, like Portugal, suffered the hardest from the effects of the sovereign debt crisis and paid the most for the injustices and errors of the adjustment programs – today, in fact, recognized by all the institutions of the troika, be it the Commission, the ECB or the IMF – they need increased support, now that the relaunch of their economies and the treatment of the many wounds left in their social fabric are on the agenda.
II. TURN THE PAGE ON AUSTERITY, RELAUNCH THE ECONOMY AND JOBS
A failed strategy and a reliable alternative
The right-wing coalition government responded incorrectly to the financing crisis in the Portuguese economy and, for this reason, bears heavy responsibility for creating the most serious economic recession and social regression in our recent history.
The wrong austerity policy has three main causes: firstly, the belief in “expansionist austerity” led to the doubling of recessive measures during the period of financial assistance.
Secondly, the right was unable to construct an overall vision of the Portuguese economy and did not understand that successive measures to reduce families' disposable income would have a brutal effect on consumption, investment and employment.
Thirdly, the right-wing coalition government lowered the expectations of economic agents, deepening the consequences of the crisis in all areas of our collective life, from the functioning of public services to private investment, from demographic contraction to social inequalities.
The comparison between the objectives set in 2011 by the right-wing coalition government to be achieved in 2015 and the government's estimates for the current year clearly highlights the dramatic dimension of the failure of the austerity policy.
300 thousand fewer jobs than expected, 13 billion euros less wealth created, 6.4 billion euros less investment, 5.6 billion euros less exports are the results that most crudely explain the size of economic and social crisis caused by the austerity of the PSD and CDS in government.
Therefore, we need to do things differently and do better.
The sustainability of public accounts and debt stabilization are basic principles of governance.
A clear commitment is necessary to a sustainable path for public accounts that guarantees the reduction of the structural deficit and allows the debt ratio to begin a downward trajectory.
The almost structural balance of public accounts and the reduction of debt are objectives assumed as a priority.
The work to produce an alternative macroeconomic scenario that the PS promoted clearly demonstrated that there is another economic policy that can reconcile rigor with recovery.
That we can do different and do better.
The elaboration of the “A decade for Portugal” scenario today allows the PS to present to the country a solid and rigorous set of different economic policy options that have been tested for their costs and benefits, preserving the sustainability of public accounts.
The degree of rigor and seriousness of this exercise constitutes an additional guarantee that the options we make today are based on a realistic framework, which has benefited from the best information and study available.
The scenario constructed confirms the PS's conviction that it is necessary to respond to the country's problems with other policies and another alternative.
Portugal needs a true economic and social recovery program for the next four years, based on three challenges to relaunch the economy:
increase family disposable income,
solve the problem of company financing and promote employment, combating precariousness.
1. INCREASE HOUSEHOLDS’ AVAILABLE INCOME TO RELAUNCH THE ECONOMY
An economic recovery with a strong employment content cannot do without stimuli to recover family income.
This constitutes, in the current conditions of the Portuguese economy, a short-term lever for improving economic activity indices
and, consequently, for more and better opportunities in the job market.
It also means a break with the austerity policy that was designed and implemented by the right-wing majority, namely through recessive measures that were not part of the financial assistance plan for Portugal negotiated in 2011.
This policy shift integrates a set of clear and coherent commitments, such as the following: The beginning of a correction to the huge increase in taxes on families that was implemented in this legislature, with the extinction of the IRS surcharge between 2016 and 2017;
The achievement of a faster recovery in the income of State workers, putting an end to extraordinary salary cuts by 2017;
Complementary support for increasing families' disposable income, with a progressive and temporary reduction in workers' contribution rates, which should reach a maximum value of 4 percentage points in 2018, starting in 2019 with a reduction in this reduction, which will take place in 8 years.
This measure stimulates domestic demand by promoting liquidity to families who work and earn low income and who are deprived of access to basic goods and services in the context of loss of household income.
The measure will also allow families to expand their consumption possibilities, generating demand and, therefore, jobs.
The State Budget will finance any temporary drop in Social Security revenues;
The creation of a new social benefit aimed at improving the income of poor workers, which will be subject to means-tested conditions and also aimed at favoring the formalization of uncertain and precarious employment relationships;
The renewal of social minimum policies by simplifying them, increasing their effectiveness, proximity management and focusing on the most vulnerable, particularly children;
Strengthening social consultation should make it possible to define an income policy from a decent work perspective and, in particular, guarantee the revaluation of the national minimum wage.
It is urgent to make up for lost time and guarantee workers a progressive appreciation of their work, reconciling the objective of strengthening social cohesion with the sustainability of wage policy.
The PS argues, therefore, that the target to be achieved for increasing the minimum wage must correspond to the update of the predicted value and that it is essential to build a new medium-term agreement with social partners that defines the criteria and a trajectory for the increase of the minimum wage in the following years;
Unlock collective bargaining.
2. SOLVE THE PROBLEM OF COMPANY FINANCING
Business investment must play a preponderant role, being a key variable for a strong and sustained recovery in economic growth.
In a context of scarcity of financing, it is necessary to find new and effective ways of financing companies and boosting economic activity and job creation.
Taking on this aim, the PS will mobilize resources and adapt the public support framework to the need for a rapid recovery in investment. To this end, it will act in six areas.
Thus, firstly, the implementation of community funds will be streamlined and accelerated, ensuring their targeting to companies and exploring new sources of European financing to reinforce financing for the economy.
Secondly, a capitalization fund will be created to support business investment.
Thirdly, greater coordination and integration of investment support will be promoted, which includes encouraging new forms of private financing that expand financing options for companies and the creation of tax incentives for investment in business projects.
Fourthly, initiatives will be adopted to encourage foreign investment in Portugal.
Fifth, obstacles will be removed and investment time and cost will be reduced through a new Simplex program for companies
. Finally, sixthly, selective investments will be studied and identified that allow maximum use of infrastructure investments already made and that can be monetized in favor of economic development.
Accelerate the execution of community funds
Taking advantage of opportunities in the next legislature involves making maximum use of the opportunities that are available to us.
One of the most relevant lies in community funds which, in the coming years, could help boost the economy, the activities of Portuguese companies and employment.
It is this fundamental instrument of public investment that needs to be accelerated and concentrated in priority areas, as it constitutes a powerful factor in helping economic development.
To reinforce and accelerate the execution of community funds, the PS will:
Give maximum priority to the extraordinary execution of European funds, involving organizational, legislative and coordination efforts with regions and partners that allow it to be carried out with quality and speed;
Adopt the specific measures necessary for the immediate operationalization of the financial instruments (capital, guarantees and loans) provided for in Portugal 2020, essential for financing business investment;
Promote the adaptation of the regulatory framework for the application of community funds quickly, ensuring quick solutions and resolving constraints;
Boost investment and the ability to attract more financing through a proactive attitude in Europe in negotiations for the investment plan announced by Juncker and an organized effort by the government to raise funds from other European budget lines in favor of Portugal ;
Create conditions, including technical capacity, for the maximum possible use not only of the community funds allocated to Portugal 2020, but also of other available financing means that are still insufficiently used;
Boost access to community funds by making the conditions and cases in which they can be used more transparent, accessible and understandable;
Allow conflicts regarding the use of community funds to be resolved in permanent alternative dispute resolution centers, more quickly and cheaply.
Create a Capitalization Fund
The PS will create a Capitalization Fund financed by European funds, with the State being able to allocate other public funds as capital investments, or the granting of loans or guarantees.
Financial institutions may contribute to the capitalization fund, also taking equity or quasi-equity positions or granting loans or guarantees.
This fund will have the following characteristics: It must allow the capture of funds from international investors, whether of an institutional nature (international venture capital funds, sovereign wealth funds, pension funds and insurance companies, etc.), or of a personalized nature (Portuguese investors from diaspora, foreign investors, etc.);
It must also be financed by reimbursements of community funds and the counterparts of “golden visas”, now reorienting them towards the objective of capitalizing companies and strengthening their autonomy;
In addition to risk capital and other capital instruments, the Capitalization Fund must give priority to innovative loan solutions under very special conditions that make them similar to equity (“quasi-equity” instruments);
The majority of financial resources must be invested in companies and investments included in clusters that are defined as strategic development for the Portuguese economy.
Strengthen and ensure greater coordination of support for investment and financing for companies
The relaunch of business investment requires two fundamental conditions.
On the one hand, policies that enhance the impacts of European funds on the economy, namely through greater coordination and consultation between public entities and between them and the financial system.
On the other hand, the expansion and diversification of companies' financing options.
Therefore, the PS will: Change the tax treatment of the financing costs of companies that promote the financing of companies through the use of equity capital
and contribute to reducing debt levels within the banking system, namely by encouraging the reinvestment of profits and evolving towards greater neutrality in the treatment of financing through equity and debt;
Double the investment tax credit for investments above 10 million euros and reduce bureaucracy in granting an automatic tax credit.
Therefore, investments up to 10M euros (the current value is 5M euros) will be eligible for an automatic tax credit of 25% under the Investment Support Tax Regime (RFAI), allowing the size of the supported projects to increase.
The contractual regime will apply to investments above 10M euros, increasing the tax credit granted from 10% to 20% of the eligible investment value made;
Establish a logic of service and personalized attention to national and international investors, with integrated value propositions of financial and tax incentives and support in accelerating licensing processes;
Reduce dependence on bank credit, reinforcing the role of the capital market in financing SMEs, in particular through capital instruments (issuance of shares), specialized private debt funds (issuance of SME bonds) or hybrid instruments (similar to capital);
Promote the acceleration of business restructuring processes and respective capitalization, creating mechanisms that facilitate the conversion of debt into equity or debt reduction in companies considered viable;
Promote the introduction of new financing instruments for investment by smaller companies, such as crowdfunding and peer2peer financing.
Pursue policies favorable to microenterprises and entrepreneurship
The PS defends the creation of mechanisms aimed at the development of micro-enterprises and entrepreneurial projects.
Create a financial advance line on account of tax credit approved under the system of tax incentives for business R&D (SIFIDE II), with deferred discount, for micro-enterprises with investments in R&D but still without collectible results in the short term, as often happens with recently created companies or with a very long appreciation cycle.
This measure aims to anticipate the enjoyment of the benefit attributed, increasing the liquidity of micro-enterprises and their investment capacity in the short term, within certain limits and conditions;
Adopt measures to facilitate the access of new SMEs to public procurement in order to facilitate access to markets for new competitors.
Launch the “Seed Program” to encourage entrepreneurship
To encourage entrepreneurship and the creation of start-ups, the PS will launch the “Seed Program” which will establish a set of tax benefits for those who want to invest in small companies in the startup phase or in the first years of start-up.
These benefits will include the following three measures: The creation of IRS benefits for those who, being willing to share the risk inherent to development, invest their savings in the capital of these companies;
More favorable taxation of capital gains on securities or real estate, when these are applied to startups;
The adoption of a more favorable tax regime in the taxation of capital gains arising from the success of projects carried out by these companies in the sale of shares of capital, after a relevant investment period.
This support for companies in the start-up phase will be complemented with a new impetus for the development of the risk capital market in Portugal, based on a strong use of available community funds, the guarantee system, the mobilization of international investors for the development of this market and guaranteeing fiscal stability for investors.
Attract more and better foreign direct investment
A new drive to attract foreign direct investment proves to be strategic to enable the expansion of financial and non-financial resources available in the Portuguese economy, that is, to increase investment levels and reinforce the competitiveness of the economic fabric.
In this sense, the PS undertakes to: Design and implement a specific plan to attract structuring foreign investment that enhances qualified human resources and results from R&D projects, which enhances our geo-economic position,
take advantage of the competitive advantages existing in the economic fabric
, collaborate in the sustained valorization of natural resources
and which, in addition, can function as a factor in stimulating new promising clusters for the Portuguese economy;
Invest in the valorization of the territory as a way of attracting foreign investment, developing an integrated offer, for a long time horizon, that integrates tax benefits, co-financing commitments, visa policy facilities for immigrants and logistical support, among other benefits;
Launch specific campaigns to publicize the potential for welcoming foreign investment aimed at international and development banks, venture capital ecosystems, consultancy companies and international law firms, organizations that disseminate international competitiveness rankings, etc.;
Boost the knowledge and influence of the diaspora network in their host countries, to promote the attraction of foreign investment.
Relaunch SIMPLEX for companies to reduce investment time and cost
Bureaucracy generates time and money consumption that harm investment, create excessive context costs and harm the company's and entrepreneurs' dedication to creating business, wealth and employment.
Therefore, the PS assumes that a SIMPLEX program will be relaunched for companies and economic activity, namely through the following initiatives:
Approve a set of urgent administrative simplification measures to reduce contextual costs in business life, focusing on the most critical aspects of company activity and the elimination of excessive or disproportionate requirements;
Relaunch the “Zero Licensing” program for investment and business activities,
eliminating licenses and previous control acts and replacing them with reinforced supervision, after activities have started;
Review and simplify the regime applicable to responsible business zones (ZER);
Launch the “Single Declaration” program, eliminating declaratory obligations and mandatory communications for the State and other public entities that are not necessary (namely in the areas of taxes, Social Security, environmental information and statistics), establishing a single point for sending information , when it is essential;
Approve a “Zero Tax for Innovation” regime, exempting certain types of companies created by young investors and innovative start-ups from paying administrative fees and fees associated with various areas of business life.
Study and identification of selective, complementary and specific investments, which allow the valorization and profitability of public investment in infrastructure already made
The last few decades have been marked by strong public investment in the modernization of basic infrastructure.
Now is the time to use and take advantage of these infrastructures, which constitute a precious asset to boost the country's competitiveness, our companies and job creation.
The PS will therefore give priority to selective and complementary investments that make it possible to value the basic investment already made and implemented and that create synergies and enhance existing resources such as science and technology capacity, natural resources or Portugal's geo-economic position in the world.
Therefore, it is necessary to study and identify rigorously and accurately which are these selective investments, capable of allowing maximum use of the conditions we already have and which can still be made profitable.
This option should therefore provide greater profitability for investments already made and contribute to the viability of private investment.
3. PROMOTE EMPLOYMENT, COMBAT PRECARIOUSNESS
The austerity policy followed by the right-wing coalition had the effect of an unprecedented increase in unemployment, with devastating social effects on young people, less qualified citizens, families and the thousands of Portuguese people who were left without a job.
It is therefore urgent to build an agenda to promote employment, combat precariousness
and that allows for the resumption of the dynamism of social dialogue at all levels, from social consultation to collective negotiation at sectoral and company level, as a counterpoint to the marginalization and reiterated disrespect by social partners and the contempt and even boycott against collective negotiation that characterized the right-wing coalition governance.
Focus active employment policies on combating youth unemployment and long-term unemployment, supporting employment in tradable goods sectors and highly job-creating sectors
The PSD/CDS government chose to act without discretion in active employment policies with regard to audiences, sectors or requirements for effective job creation.
The PS argues that active employment policies should be more selective.
Instead of a general and undifferentiated activation of people in the labor market, they should rather be aimed at combating unemployment in the segments and groups most affected, such as young people and the long-term unemployed,
and the promotion of employment in sectors with potential for job creation and in tradable goods, in conjunction with the strategy of modernization and competitiveness of the economy intended for the country.
In addition to the scourge of long-term unemployment, active employment policies must help respond to the real blockage that young people face today when entering the job market, in fact in the spirit of the “Youth Guarantee” launched at European level, designing programs of youth employment that, with adequate resources, favor the sustainable insertion of young people in the job market and that do not limit themselves to promoting precariousness, as has been the prerogative of the current government.
It is also with the aim of promoting employment that the reduction of VAT on restaurants to 13% is advocated
and priority is given to creating programs to strongly encourage urban rehabilitation and the recovery of Portuguese historical heritage, as sectors that strongly promote employment are at stake.
Active policies for effective employment.
The use of active employment policies must contribute to the creation of sustainable employment and not serve to meet labor needs.
The true ultimate beneficiaries must be people, because active policies cannot be converted into a form of subsidizing precariousness.
Therefore, the PS will combat the abusive and distorted use of active employment policies which, contrary to its original idea of ​​approaching the labor market through labor insertion, promote precariousness, diminish the dignity of work and reduce its value .
For example, it is no longer possible to envisage the widespread and repeated use of internships as a substitute for hiring by employers, without this leading to effective job creation.
These bad practices harm both the accumulation of human capital by companies and the financial sustainability of policies themselves.
Launch a youth employment support program “Contrato-Geração”
The PS defends the launch of a program that acts on two fronts to promote job creation, through:
Support for part-time retirement
and, on the other, incentives for companies to hire unemployed young people or those looking for their first job.
The aim is to promote the permanence of workers closer to retirement age in the job market, while promoting the generational renewal of companies.
Thus, workers will be able, if they so wish, to reduce their working time instead of opting for early retirement and, at the same time, make room for hiring young people who are unemployed or looking for their first job.
This measure aims to promote active aging and youth employment,
reduce the rigidity of the option between prolonging professional careers and early retirement with strong penalties,
promote the sharing of intergenerational experiences and ensure the harmonious replacement of generations, with the creation of youth employment;
An employment support program for companies that simultaneously hire unemployed young people or those looking for their first job and long-term unemployed people, respecting the conditions of “net job creation” and permanent hiring, except in exceptional cases.
Support the strengthening of skills and employability of unemployed graduates
To respond to the problem of unemployed graduates, it is necessary to develop advanced training programs, specifically aimed at people with this profile.
These programs must focus on reinforcing the knowledge already acquired with transversal or specific skills, which value young people in the job market.
In particular, it is proposed to launch a skills reconversion program aimed at the information and communication technologies sector, including the acquisition of tools in the field of code programming.
This program should make it possible to respond to the lack of human resources trained in these areas, contributing to overcoming the difficulties of hiring companies operating in Portugal and attracting more foreign investment in emerging sectors.
The implementation must be done in partnership with universities and companies, covering all districts of the country.
Stimulate job creation through greater appreciation and training of entrepreneurship
Young companies are responsible for almost half of the jobs created in Portugal in recent years.
High-growth companies represent a small proportion of the business sector, but make a strong contribution to job creation.
To enhance the dynamics of creating new companies in emerging and innovative sectors
and, consequently, stimulate the creation of more and better jobs, policies to promote entrepreneurship are essential.
The PS will promote business development by adopting measures that contribute to eliminating barriers to entrepreneurship
and enhance the creativity and capacity for initiative of the Portuguese and foreign investors who choose Portugal to create jobs and generate wealth.
In this context, the PS takes the following fundamental measures:
Create a large business accelerator, national in scope but with European relevance, that supports the internationalization of startups, through a specialized mentoring network and support for internationalization, also promoting exchanges for growing startups and those in the expansion phase;
Create the National Network of Incubators, promoting cooperation, sharing resources and mutually leveraging the initiatives of its members.
This network will also aim to promote and support the development of new quality incubators in areas complementary to the existing network;
Create the National Network of Fab Labs (or prototyping), allowing the various existing equipment to be interconnected, creating synergies between them and promoting the emergence of new prototyping spaces.
In this area, it will also be relevant to develop and promote the connection of Fab Labs to entrepreneurship, education and research;
Promote entrepreneurial culture in young people through the introduction of entrepreneurship modules or courses in public schools and the development of student internship programs in startups, incubators or accelerators.
National Program to Support the Social and Solidarity Economy
The PS views the social economy as a form of economic organization and production of services with a determining role in the expansion of employment,
of equal opportunities
and in the promotion of social goods,
environmental and historical factors that support local and regional development.
In this sense, the PS will: Launch a National Support Program for the Social and Solidarity Economy, aimed at promoting job creation and social cohesion, including new instruments such as “Ethical Banking”;
Modernize and consolidate the sector through administrative simplification mechanisms such as “cooperative on the spot” and the promotion of municipal social economy networks, among other measures;
Promote the creation of partnerships between entities in the public sectors and the social economy, in the form of “regie cooperatives”, public interest cooperatives or others, with a view to reusing, redeploying and monetizing equipment, channeling resources for this purpose financial resources from European funds;
Support the development and training of social entrepreneurs and promoters of projects that aim to create new solutions for social problems identified in society, with the aim of promoting the emergence of new organizations or social initiatives.
Combat precariousness: avoid the excessive use of fixed-term contracts, false green slips and other atypical forms of work, strengthening regulation and changing the rules of your Social Security regime
Precariousness has grown significantly in recent years, particularly among younger people.
On the one hand, the generalization of precarious labor relations weakens the labor market itself and the economy.
The competitiveness of companies in a developed European space must be achieved through the valorization of their human capital and their high qualifications, which implies adequate labor relations that preserve lasting and long-term investments, capable of taking advantage of these assets.
Furthermore, on the other hand, excessively precarious labor relations that go beyond reasonable limits jeopardize the existence of prospects for social development and people's lives, jeopardizing the dignity of work that must be preserved.
With the aim of combating precariousness and reinforcing the dignity of work, the PS defends: To reduce the excessive number of fixed-term contracts,
improve worker protection
and increase the rate of conversion of fixed-term contracts into permanent ones, it will be proposed to limit the fixed-term contract regime, which should no longer be the almost universal rule for contracting, strongly limiting its use;
Increase the contribution to Social Security of companies that show excessive turnover of their staff as a result of the excessive precariousness of labor relations;
Facilitate the demonstration of the existence of employment contracts in service provision situations, to dissuade employers from resorting to false independent work hours.
The effective existence of an employment contract must be considered, and not just presumed, when the characteristics legally provided for in this matter are met.
Furthermore, consideration should be given to creating a quick, safe and effective mechanism for recognizing situations of effective employment contracts in these situations, thus exempting the worker from having to go to court to prove the facts established, without prejudice to arbitration. or judicial action by the employer;
Improve inspection and action capacity in labor matters, so as to increase the capacity to regulate the labor market by increasing the deterrence of non-compliance with labor rules and also by verifying compliance with them;
Reevaluate the contracting entity regime, with a view to reinforcing justice in the distribution of contributory effort between employers and self-employed workers with strong or total dependence on income from a single contracting entity, as part of the effort to combat false green receipts;
Review the rules for determining the amount of contributions to be paid by workers who issue green receipts, so that these contributions are now levied on the income actually earned, using the most recent months of remuneration as a reference;
Evaluate the unemployment protection regime for self-employed workers, detecting possible inefficiencies in its operationalization in light of the protection needs and the objectives outlined for this new protection regime;
Carry out an assessment of the risks covered by this regime, with a view to achieving a greater balance between the contributory duties and rights of self-employed workers and effective social protection that improves the perception of benefits, contributing to greater linkage of these workers to the Social Security pension system .
Reduce litigation, promote labor conciliation
In labor conflict processes, including processes involving termination of employment contracts, the use of agile conflict resolution mechanisms must be explored, with legal certainty, similar to what already happens in other fields.
This could provide gains for all parties, particularly in terms of speed, predictability and costs associated with the process.
Therefore, the PS will: Study with social partners the adoption of arbitration mechanisms and the use of means of alternative dispute resolution in the context of labor disputes, without prejudice to the right to appeal to the courts;
Formalize and regulate in law, for new contracts, the practice already adopted in many companies of terminating employment contracts, adopting a conciliatory and voluntary procedure for this purpose, which regulates the steps and formalities for the termination of the employment contract.
This conciliatory procedure between the company and the worker must begin through consultation/information with workers' representative structures and must follow the following rules:
When this conciliatory process is used, redundancy payments will be higher than the current ones: at least eighteen days for each year of service in the first three years and 15 days for each additional year, with a minimum of 30 days and a maximum of 15 months, respecting collective bargaining instruments.
These compensations will be tax-exempt;
When the conciliation process ends with the worker's agreement, the regime of involuntary termination of the employment contract applies to the worker, for the purpose of determining applicable social benefits, such as unemployment;
When the conciliation process ends without an agreement, the applicable regime is the general one, with the prohibition of unfair dismissal, the right to reinstatement and the level of compensation currently set by law remaining unchanged.
Thus, access to the courts is always guaranteed, to react against a possible dismissal without just cause, if this occurs after the conciliation procedure has been exhausted, without agreement, and to demand in that headquarters, as is already the case today, the other benefits and reinstatements currently provided for by law.
Limit use by precarious work state
Establish a clear policy to progressively eliminate the use of precarious work and occupational-type programs in the public sector as a way of meeting long-term needs for the functioning of different public services.
Relaunch social dialogue and sectoral collective bargaining, articulating it at the company level, including in the public sector
It is essential to sustain a consistent agenda of change in a strong commitment to resuming the dynamism of social dialogue at all levels, from social consultation to collective bargaining at sectoral and company levels, as a counterpoint to the marginalization and disrespect that have characterized recent years.
To this end, it is necessary to: Overcome the situation of rupture in collective bargaining through extension ordinances and the promotion of collective bargaining, making a clear commitment to break with the restrictive practice of the current right-wing government in publishing extension ordinances and establishing provisions clear about reasonable legal deadlines for publication.
In the same sense, incentives must be created for collective contracting, to be negotiated with social partners, giving this a negotiating space that is advantageous for all parties;
Repeal the possibility, introduced in the 2012 Labor Code, of the existence of an individual time bank by mere “agreement” between the employer and the worker, sending the time bank to the sphere of collective bargaining or group agreements, where the organization of working time must be regulated.
The aim is to rebalance labor legislation, as well as eliminate the confusion deliberately introduced in the regulation of flexibility in the organization of working time, which allowed the dispersion and individualization of different working hours in the same companies;
Promote, with social partners, innovation and negotiated modernization of labor regulation at the sectoral level, and promote its articulation with social dialogue and practices at company level, with specificities that can only be considered on this scale;
Unlock collective bargaining in the public sector, paving the way for negotiation with social partners on salary matters and issues such as working hours that were unilaterally changed and have since been blocked by the PSD/CDS government. As an employer, the State must set an example.
III A NEW IMPULSE FOR CONVERGENCE WITH EUROPE
A new impulse in the European Union
In recent years, Europe has embarked on a path of integration and reinforcement of European policy instruments, but always too late and incompletely, in reaction to speculative attacks or the risk of deflation.
This was the case with the strengthening of European Economic Governance, with the creation of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), the implementation of the Banking Union, the significant reinforcement of the role and instruments of Monetary Policy and, more recently, with the political recognition of the role investment in economic growth and cohesion.
There are also important steps in strengthening the democratic legitimacy of the European Commission and the powers and competence of the European Parliament that must be continued and enhanced.
However, despite these developments, the effects of the European option for pro-cyclical austerity are still strongly felt.
Unemployment galloped, economic and social divergence increased and the risk of deflation took hold.
It was not the rigidity of labor markets or products and services that caused the brutal increase in unemployment and divergences in the Eurozone.
It was a global financial crisis and subsequent economic policy errors, particularly the option for austerity policies across Europe, which caused a significant setback in investment and, more globally, in demand.
But the structural cause of this crisis results from the monetary union not being accompanied by the strengthening of cohesion, which accentuated economic divergences and asymmetric effects within the Euro Zone,
which needs to be corrected, providing it with effective budgetary capacity and mechanisms that allow it to absorb the effects of systemic crises, such as unemployment.
It is a fact that the European Union needs to be rebalanced, but this does not make the PS waver in its conviction that Europe is the space of peace, prosperity and social and economic progress where we want to be.
Europe and the European market represent the best opportunity for social development for the Portuguese inside and outside our borders. Therefore, it still and always makes sense to fight for the European project.
But the Europe we want is a Europe of results, of progress for all, and not just for some, of employment, peace and social cohesion for Europeans.
A Europe where the principle of equality between States is respected.
Therefore, it is important to act quickly and in a timely manner, and not react to the next crisis, be it institutional, political or economic.
1. DEFEND AN INTELLIGENT READING OF BUDGETARY DISCIPLINE
Rebalancing Economic Governance.
Through common economic governance, priority must be given to reducing economic and social imbalances.
Therefore, firstly, the fiscal position, but more generally the external position of the European economies, must be seen in the Eurozone economy as a whole.
It is necessary to take into account and act effectively both in relation to Member States with deficits and those with surpluses, as both phenomena cause imbalances in Europe's economy that are reflected in people's quality of life.
This approach will decisively favor the fight against deflation in Europe.
Secondly, economic governance instruments themselves, such as the European Semester, must be deepened and rebalanced towards socio-economic governance.
It is urgent to bring specific recommendations to Member States closer to the concrete reality of each country, recommending reforms that truly favor the priorities for the competitiveness and cohesion of European economies.
To this end, this instrument must be subject to greater democratic scrutiny by the European Parliament and national parliaments.
Thirdly, within the scope of policy coordination, additional steps must be taken towards fiscal and social harmonization:
Fiscal and social dumping (particularly in labor legislation) is leading to a race to the bottom in financing the European social model, with predictably serious consequences in the European Union itself.
Finally, fourthly, the PS argues that the Eurogroup cannot become the main political decision-making body in matters of governance in Europe.
Decisions in the Eurozone far transcend financial matters and fundamental European policy options must be adopted within the framework of the main bodies of the European Union: European Commission, Council and European Parliament.
Likewise, a more regular functioning of the Eurozone Summit is necessary.
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Stability
In the context of public finances, the recent evolution regarding the more flexible reading of the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact is already a reality and must be welcomed, despite the right-wing coalition government having resisted this change, which is obviously advantageous for Portugal.
This path needs to continue to be followed.
It will be necessary to deepen this evolution, demanding the expansion of conditions and greater gradualism in the budgetary path in negative economic cycles.
Likewise, attention must be paid to periods of structural reforms or investment aimed at favoring the competitiveness conditions of European economies, particularly with regard to the consideration of national participation in investments supported by funds from the European Union itself.
Still within the policy coordination framework, even in the context of improving and normalizing debt refinancing conditions, all opportunities must be explored to, in a cooperative manner between States and institutions, reduce the burden of debt service on national budgets.
Consolidate the new ambition for Monetary Policy
The deepening and clarification in recent years of the role of the European Central Bank (ECB) was crucial in dissuading speculative attacks on the Euro and allowing a historic reduction in interest rates in the Euro Zone.
It is important to consolidate this vision of the ECB as the guarantor of monetary stability but also as a financier of last resort in Europe, a role that proved to be decisive for the markets' confidence in the Euro as an irreversible project.
Exploit the potential of structural and investment funds and community programs
Investment Relaunch
Europe needs investment to revive growth and job creation, but also to accelerate its transition to a greener, smarter and more inclusive economy.
Investment has fallen sharply in recent years, adding to the fact that this fall occurred unevenly, deepening divergences within the Union.
The PS argues that the European Strategic Investment Fund (EFSI) needs more resources, perhaps in order to finance new investment platforms that enable cooperation between public and private entities and also needs to be implemented in such a way that a special attention to Member States affected by crises and errors in the troika's policies.
Member States must be guaranteed the best possible budgetary conditions to implement this financing.
Deepen economic growth through European markets, open new markets in the world
The promotion of European policies aimed at growth will involve areas where Portugal can prove to be an attractive country for new sectors of the economy, such as energy, where very significant steps have already been taken,
or the digital economy, in line with a human resources qualification policy that makes it possible to take advantage of the best national capabilities.
The Digital Union and the Energy Union must become a reality and also respond to the specific needs of Portugal.
They will mean more services for companies and citizens in the crucial area of ​​new information technologies,
as well as lower energy costs,
which are a decisive factor in promoting the competitiveness of companies and greater connectivity with large European energy and information networks.
Likewise, the return to commercial policy, with the approval of new commercial treaties, especially with the United States of America or with the largest Asian countries, could represent important opportunities for growth in economic activity through exports, as long as the national interests.
Ensuring a level playing field in the context of Economic and Monetary Union
Financial Markets
The Banking Union has undergone decisive and important developments in recent years.
European financial markets are now more integrated and thus enjoy greater solidity.
However, it is urgent to create a credit line that will act as security for the Resolution Fund, as its intervention capacity in its initial phase could easily be exhausted.
And the PS will also clearly state that the Banking Union is not complete until the European Deposit Guarantee Mechanism is established.
Likewise, the relaunch of the Single Capital Market could be positive if it can lead to less dependence of companies on bank financing,
as well as more European resources for the necessary capitalization of Portuguese companies.
Building Fiscal Capacity for Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
As advocated in the Report of the four Presidents of December 2012, the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) needs to add its own budgetary capacity to the single currency, built gradually, for example based on resources from the future Financial Transaction Tax.
The PS unhesitatingly defends a reinforcement of the EMU's budgetary capacity.
This budgetary capacity must, in a first phase, be introduced with two objectives: responding to asymmetric shocks in Member States
and support and accompany Member States in new convergence efforts through reforms that promote employment
and the reduction of asymmetries (and the probability of asymmetric shocks occurring) in the Euro Zone.
Regain citizens’ trust in the European social model, deepening it
Back to Social Cohesion
Europe needs more economic convergence.
But the survival of Europe as we built it more than fifty years ago depends on social cohesion
and strengthening the living conditions of the European middle classes, which have been seriously affected in recent years.
Therefore, Europe has to give a signal to Europeans about what really matters.
It is necessary to define with rigor and legal force the labor and social protection standards to be guaranteed in the European Area and the Euro Zone, supported by the necessary financial and political instruments.
The European Union was born as a project of peace and solidarity, to create bonds of trust and well-being that prevent new wars.
The passage of time should not make us forget this path and the reasons that motivated it are still present, especially in a Europe with a much larger number of Member States.
Therefore, the PS argues that the European Union must resume major mobilizing projects that create advantages and improvements in the lives of citizens, starting with the social area.
Therefore, the PS will defend: //The creation of the Social Cohesion and Employment Eurogroup, which will put the fight against poverty back
and unemployment and the promotion of quality of life for all at the center of the action of European leaders;
The concertation of measures at European level to combat unemployment,
including guaranteeing and financing social benefits;
The creation of precise measures at European level in the social field, which are reflected in a positive, expressive and as direct way as possible in the lives of European citizens.
Fight for more democracy in the European Union
Strengthen the European institutional framework
The current European institutional framework has often been surpassed or replaced by ad hoc mechanisms, which render some Member States secondary.
This is an unacceptable position that has not merited a reaction from the PSD/CDS government.
Portugal has always been part of the hard core of the European integration process and it is the first time in almost thirty years that a government has resigned from its role as decision-maker and partner at European level.
Portugal must defend the deepening of European integration,
but maintain the defense of the community decision-making method, which places the Commission at the center of executive action, with reinforced democratic legitimacy, and the Member States on equal terms, without labels of first line and back line, because that is the path that best defends national and European interests.
Strengthening democracy is the right way to deepen the European integration process. Therefore, the PS will defend:
The implementation of new mechanisms for the effective participation of national parliaments in the European political process - including parliamentary decision-making power in the European semester, particularly in terms of approving the National Reform Plan;
The creation of an institutional system of accountability of the European Commission and governments to national parliaments.
More democracy also involves valuing the role of the European Commission as a body truly independent of the Member States, responsible for executive functions and guardian of the Treaties.
The PS defends that this role of the Commission is increasingly based on the democratic legitimacy granted to it by the European Parliament and that it can increasingly reflect the choices of European citizens made in European elections.
Finally, defending Europe means continuing and building on some of the greatest achievements in the past.
Therefore, freedom of movement in space cannot be called into question under any pretext, be it economic, political or security,
as well as all nationalist and xenophobic proposals that seek to threaten this right must be rejected, regardless of their origin in radical movements or member state governments.
In this area, the PS will defend that: The protection of fundamental rights and solidarity must be at the center of European policies as essential values ​​of the European project,
any political proposal that aims to restrict freedom of movement and that questions equal treatment between European citizens is not acceptable;
New instruments and measures must be created that directly benefit the lives of European citizens and companies and that deepen their ties and relationships.
This is the right way to show the benefits that the European well-being project can have for everyone.
Actively participate at European level in the governance of financial globalization and the promotion of investment
Strengthening the EU's role in the world
The EU must definitively assert its common foreign policy and be capable of becoming a political actor on a global level with a strong and respected voice, first and foremost by its Member States, which must refrain from taking dispersed positions that only contribute to weaken the EU's global position.
The progress achieved with the creation of the position of High Representative was a positive point that now needs to be recognized and respected by the diplomacies of the Member States, translating this European position into an articulated mechanism with an impact on European positions in international organizations, including in the Nations United.
In this context, the PS defends Portugal's active participation in the review of the European Strategic Concept that takes into account our interests at a global level and that reinforces the role of the Portuguese-speaking space.
As part of the affirmation of the EU's foreign policy, the PS also defends:
The uncompromising defense of the protection of fundamental rights, solidarity and social development within the framework of its relations with other international organizations and other states;
The need for an ambitious proposal in the transatlantic relationship, where Portugal can position itself as the center of a large geo-political space and economic market.
Therefore, the negotiation of the TTIP (EU/US Trade and Investment Treaty) must be supported, respecting the constitutive values ​​of the European economic and social model and guaranteeing the defense of national interests within the negotiation framework;
The appreciation of geographic positioning, human relationships and the potential for cooperation in training CPLP countries that are also ACP partners, such as Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, S. Tomé and Príncipe, Angola and Mozambique;
The valorization of other strategic partnerships, for example with Brazil, with the countries of Central and South America and with China;
The review of the European Security Strategy as an essential axis for adapting the EU's external action to current challenges and risks;
The approval of a “European Strategy against Radicalization and Terrorism” that lists challenges, threats, objectives and methods of the Union, to prevent radicalization and combat terrorism, which promotes the strengthening of coordination and information sharing between Member States and European bodies;
The implementation of the European Maritime Security Strategy and its Action Plan, adapting the latter to the review (when this happens) of the European Security Strategy.
2. A NEW IMPULSE FOR CONVERGENCE WITH EUROPE
The financial and sovereign debt crisis highlighted important asymmetries in Europe, and in particular in the Euro Zone.
This imbalance in the Euro Zone determines a reduction in potential growth and a brutal degradation of cohesion indicators in the European space.
Ultimately, it negatively influences the solidity of the single currency.
The New Impulse Program for Convergence in Europe, referred to below, is an important commitment resulting from a proposal from the PS to the European Socialist Party and aims to identify and overcome a set of obstacles to the competitiveness of European economies, introducing mechanisms innovative support and monitoring of reform programs to overcome them.
It is time to put an end to the idea that “structural reforms” necessarily imply the path of reducing labor rights,
the privatization of strategic sectors of the economy
and the reduction of social rights.
These “structural reforms” were followed by the troika in Portugal and other countries, as well as by several right-wing governments in Europe.
The results are visible: economic growth continues to be unsatisfactory and people's well-being and social rights have suffered severe limitations without an effective result in favor of competitiveness.
Interestingly, a very different policy was followed with positive results in the United States of America, where the 2008 financial crisis began, which gave rise to the sovereign debt crisis that contaminated Europe.
It is true that it is necessary to change, do differently and do better, but the “structural reforms” that must be made are different.
In this sense, the PS sought to identify, in the proposal it presented to the European Socialist Party, what these blockages are and what critical factors and measures need to be adopted to promote the competitiveness of European economies.
To overcome these obstacles, it is proposed to create a new European program to promote reforms for competitiveness, aimed at promoting and encouraging their implementation in each Member State, through a specific program, and obtaining positive results and effective.
Methodology
For the PS and for the European socialist, social-democratic and labor parties that propose different “structural reforms”, the possibility of creating a specific program for each Member State should therefore be adopted, in order to deepen the path of convergence with to Europe. This program should seek to respond to the following challenges:
Relaunch economic growth, considering the objective of consolidating public finances (gradual reduction of the budget deficit within a medium-term target and depending on the results of the reforms to be introduced and sustained “deleveraging” of the economy, both in terms of public and private debt ); It is
Correction of competitiveness imbalances between Eurozone countries,
with a view to consolidating the single currency through the real convergence of economies.
These specific programs must be accompanied by the necessary reforms in the governance of the Eurozone and be linked to the Juncker Plan to reinforce investment in the EU.
Therefore, in each specific program, the Member State must identify the objectives to be achieved.
These objectives must represent competitiveness obstacles to be overcome over a period of 3 to 5 years, with qualitative and, whenever possible and/or desirable, quantitative targets being defined.
The program must create rights and duties for Member States and European institutions and be based on financial incentives to be identified and allocated for this purpose.
Financing
This program for convergence in the EU will be associated with financing to carry out each action.
Such means therefore constitute a new opportunity that is opening up for Portugal to achieve the real transformations in its competitiveness that it really needs.
The financial incentives for implementing this program for convergence in Europe should result from a combination of the following instruments:
Structural funds (multiannual financial frameworks 2014/2020);
New financing, through an instrument that provides specific financial incentives allocated to this reform and investment program for convergence, which will be indexed to the achievement of agreed results and pre-set targets;
European Investment Fund;
Use of other financing mechanisms available through the European Investment Bank, the European Stability Mechanism, as well as other types of interventions, for example from the European Central Bank.
Overcoming obstacles to competitiveness in the Euro Zone – the case of Portugal
The PS will defend the creation of a program of this type in Europe and that Portugal must be at the forefront to benefit from it, as it is necessary to provide our economy with the competitiveness that it does not have today and that is critical for the creation of wealth, employment and social well-being.
A program of this nature will make it possible to attack the real causes that harm our development and will enable the true “structural reforms” that Europe needs, associating them with a public investment program.
It is a fact that, in recent decades, Portugal has made a great investment effort in modernizing its economy.
However, some important obstacles to the external competitiveness of the Portuguese economy remain.
To relaunch sustained growth in the economy, it is necessary to deepen growth-oriented reforms, including:
Correction of the historical qualifications deficit;
The modernization of the State;
Smart urban renewal and energy efficiency;
Business innovation;
The deleveraging of the economic fabric.
It is on these aims that the program that the PS will present to community institutions and Member States will be based, within the scope of the new program for convergence with Europe defended by the socialist, social-democratic and labor parties.
Taking into account the representation of socialist, social-democratic and labor parties in Europe and the agreement reached, the PS has the obligation to present to the Portuguese the positions it will take for Portugal within the framework of this new way of promoting competitiveness in Europe.
There is a path and a new opportunity in the European Union that is now opening up and it will be in this legislature that we will be able to benefit from it.
The Electoral Program that is now presented follows and develops these main lines.
IV A STRONG, INTELLIGENT AND MODERN STATE
The PSD/CDS government revealed a constant prejudice towards the State and the public sector, preferring the path of privatization,
the reduction of the State's strategic and central public services and the reduction of its critical mass and staff.
This results from a view of the role of the public sector based on the prejudice that private sectors are more competent and effective than the State.
The PS has a different view.
Recent cases have demonstrated that the State cannot alienate its essential and strategic function in several areas, otherwise the country could lose important assets.
In fact, recent situations related to institutions in the financial sector and telecommunications have demonstrated that the private sector does not always provide a better service and a better option for the country's interests.
Furthermore, the PS has already demonstrated with SIMPLEX that the State can be agile and effective, providing better services to citizens and companies.
The PS therefore defends a strong State, which does not alienate its functions and which is present in strategic areas for the public interest.
But this State must simultaneously be intelligent and modern.
A strong State does not mean an oversized or overstaffed public sector.
On the contrary, its greater capacity for intervention and change must result from its agility and not from the number of departments or managers.
Finally, a strong State must be modern, that is, capable of providing innovative services and solutions, through digital and simplified methods, without contextual costs and focusing its intervention on the needs of citizens.
It is this strong, intelligent and modern State that the PS defends
and that must be present to improve the quality of democracy,
in National Defense,
to ensure freedom and security,
to speed up justice,
to ensure effective regulation
and to enhance the autonomous regions.
Likewise, a strong, intelligent and modern State requires a new way of governing, decisive action in favor of decentralization,
of simplified procedures, innovation and digitalization.
1. IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF DEMOCRACY
Today, in Portuguese society, there is a lack of trust among citizens regarding politics, democratic institutions and those responsible for them.
The PS recognizes the need and urgency to reverse this trend and, therefore, will act decisively in five key areas:
In valuing representative democracy, starting with the reform of the electoral system, which is associated with measures to expand and facilitate the exercise of the right to vote;
In the development of new citizen participation rights, such as through a program of direct questions to the government of the Republic, as well as in the valorization of existing mechanisms, such as the right to petition;
In preventing and combating corruption through greater transparency, democratic scrutiny and control of legality;
In the more direct intervention of citizens before the Constitutional Court;
In strengthening the protection of fundamental rights that, due to the tools of the information society, can today be called into question in new ways.
Reform the electoral system and adopt mechanisms that expand and encourage democratic participation
The PS is aware of the need to bring voters closer to those elected and to expand and facilitate the exercise of the right to vote. To this end, it will adopt the following measures:
Reform the electoral system for the Assembly of the Republic, introducing single-member constituencies, without prejudice to the adoption of mechanisms that guarantee the proportionality of party representation,
promoting the reinforcement of the personalization of mandates and the accountability of elected officials, without any prejudice to pluralism;
Expand the possibility of early voting, expanding the list of professions and situations in which it applies;
Create conditions for exercising the right to vote anywhere in the country, regardless of area of ​​residence, always respecting the principle of in-person identity verification.
Strengthen mechanisms for civic participation, defense of fundamental rights and scrutiny of public institutions
The maturity of our democracy depends decisively on providing citizens with effective and rapid means to assert their rights and obtain the clarifications they deem necessary from public institutions. For this purpose, the PS will take the following measures:
The adoption of a Participatory Budget at the State Budget level, providing for the allocation of a determined annual budget to projects proposed and chosen by citizens to be financed and carried out in certain areas of the Government and State Administration, giving priority to measures promoting quality of life;
The introduction of effective consequences for failure to respond to a petition of general interest to the Assembly of the Republic sent by Parliament to the government;
The adoption of the possibility for foreign citizens residing in Portugal to also present petitions to sovereign bodies;
The creation of means that allow the monitoring of processes associated with petitions and that facilitate access to complete information on the exercise of this right, namely through a website that functions as a “petitioner's desk”;
The development of a “Citizen Questions to the Government” project as a way of facilitating contact between the government, Public Administration and citizens,
offering any citizen the possibility of submitting any question to the government or Public Administration, with a designated public entity being responsible for ensuring, in liaison with the relevant entities, the respective clarification within a reasonable period of time;
The promotion of permanent listening mechanisms for social movements and citizens, through which Parliament and the government can contact and listen to them regularly;
The introduction of benefits for employers that create conditions for the civic participation of their employees;
The annual evaluation of the fulfillment of the promises present in the government program, with the participation of a group of citizens chosen randomly from among voters who pre-registered;
Reinforcing the theme of Education for Citizenship in school curricula.
Strengthen the protection of fundamental rights
The right to the protection of personal data, as enshrined in the Constitution, today faces new risks resulting from the enormous capacity for data collection and processing that computer media allows.
The PS recognizes the imperative to update the legislative framework that protects informational identity, namely the right to veracity and rectification of information, the right to be forgotten, the right to protect one's good name and protection against identity appropriation.
Therefore, the PS will: Create mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating electronic systems, public and private, for recording and archiving personal data, ensuring the existence of platforms for managing requests related to the right to be forgotten and the reservation of the privacy of life private and of good name;
Create quick and expeditious mechanisms to react and obtain compensation in the face of violations of the rights to be forgotten, privacy of privacy and good name.
Make Constitutional Justice more accessible and the defense of fundamental rights and the Constitution in the Constitutional Court
The defense of fundamental rights and the Constitution involves the effective performance of the role of the Constitutional Court,
for access to it without formal requirements and disproportionate costs and for issuing quick decisions.
To this end, the PS will: Establish maximum decision deadlines in the context of abstract successive review of constitutionality, as their absence has led to great unpredictability in decision deadlines;
Create the figure of the Constitutional Assistant, who enjoys the status of amicuscuriae, which includes, in particular, the power to add to the file requests, documents, official data and statistics, as well as legal or technical opinions, even in cases where the process of abstract, preventive or successive inspection, does not result from its initiative;
Regulate the conditions under which entities with constitutional legitimacy to initiate successive abstract review of constitutionality must assess requests made to them by municipalities or citizens under the right of petition.
Increase demands and value political activity and the exercise of public office
The appearance of susceptibility of public office holders to interests unrelated to the functions they perform has contributed to undermining citizens' trust in institutions.
The PS will promote increased transparency in the exercise of public positions,
the adoption of measures that contribute to increasing levels of independence and impartiality
and also initiatives that enhance political activity and the exercise of public office.
To this end, the PS defends the following in particular: The adoption of a Code of Public Transparency, to which, in particular, holders of political positions, public managers, holders of bodies, officials and Public Administration workers will be subject, which regulates , among other aspects, the acceptance of gifts and “hospitality” provided free of charge by private entities (invitations to participate in congresses or conferences);
The regulation of the activity of private organizations that intend to participate in the definition and execution of public policies, known as lobbying;
The creation of a public register of interests in local authorities, bringing its regime closer to what is already enshrined today for deputies and members of the government;
The prohibition of accepting a judicial mandate, in actions for or against the State or any other public entities, for deputies who practice law.
2. GOVERN BETTER, GOVERN DIFFERENTLY
The PS will implement a new model for exercising government responsibilities that is more transparent, more agile and more effective,
through greater citizen involvement and participation.
Therefore, a more flexible and results-oriented governance is required, which seeks to improve the quality of legislative production
and a more efficient methodology for planning and carrying out public works of significant size.
A government organization focused on mission and results
To carry out this action, it is essential to stabilize the central core of the organic structure of the ministries, avoiding the changes introduced by successive governments.
It is also necessary that the governance structure is occasionally made more flexible depending on the political priorities assumed in the government program, without this implying significant changes in the services of the different ministerial departments.
The implementation of a results-oriented policy also implies the adaptation of the government's organic structure with a view to integrating policies that cut across the various ministerial departments, namely by strengthening the coordination powers of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers.
Medium-term Strategic Agreement that articulates economic, tax, income, employment and social protection policies
After four years of discredit caused by the right-wing coalition, due to the repeated disrespect of the social partners, it is essential to reestablish the autonomy and dignity of social consultation
and reestablish the parties' confidence in social dialogue, undermined by the way in which negotiation processes were conducted at this headquarters in recent years.
Therefore, the PS undertakes to submit to social consultation
and negotiate with partners a tripartite agreement for the legislature that articulates different policy areas to foster competitiveness and social cohesion, which will allow:
Create a medium-term horizon, within the legislature, of shared objectives and policy stability, introducing security, predictability and credibility into political processes and creating better conditions for decisions by different agents;
Create a solid and broad support base for measures in the strategic areas of public policies for competitiveness and social cohesion;
To virtuously articulate economic, fiscal, income, employment and social protection policy measures, among other areas considered decisive in the Agenda for the Decade.
Improving the quality of legislation
To improve the quality of the legislation that is produced, it is essential to resume planning mechanisms for legislative activity that aim to set priorities and monitor legislative activity in order to avoid useless efforts or efforts without political or social reasons to justify them.
Therefore, the PS will seek to ensure the implementation of a program to improve legislative practices, namely through the following actions:
Approve legislation in the Council of Ministers only once a month, maintaining the weekly frequency of its meetings;
Set two dates per year for the entry into force of all legislation that affects the operation of companies;
Ensure that changes to tax regimes are made only once in each legislature, preferably at the beginning;
Simplify the Budget Law, ensuring that it only contains budgetary provisions;
Repeal useless or unnecessary laws, setting quantitative targets for reducing the legislative stock, making consolidated versions of structuring legislation available;
Revitalize planning and scheduling processes for the transposition of community directives, ensuring timely transposition and avoiding successive legislative interventions for this purpose;
Promote legislative codification exercises, eliminating scattered legislation;
Monitor the “life cycle” of legislation and use methodologies that allow the assessment of suitability for its initial objectives;
Ensure that the approval of legislation is accompanied by the approval of all regulations that implement and implement it, avoiding the existence of unregulated laws or the law being distorted during its regulation phase;
Prepare guidance guides for institutions responsible for applying legislation and regulations, in order to improve their application and ensure the highest level of uniformity possible;
Disseminate information about published laws, in clear language, in Portuguese and English, accessible to all citizens, including a summary in audio format for blind people;
Make the entire legislative collection of the Diário da República available free of charge on the Internet; this service will be completed with access to research tools, consolidated legislation, a legal translator, a legal dictionary and legislation and regulations related to the legislative act in question;
Previously and subsequently evaluate the impact of structuring legislation, especially that which entails costs for SMEs.
A new methodology for programming and executing public works
The process of planning, decision-making, definition of contractual and financing models for large infrastructures must be profoundly changed, in order to eliminate ill-founded decisions, insufficiently evaluated and altered according to governmental vicissitudes.
This is one of the areas where the need to reconstitute Competence Centers in the State is most felt, which prevent the risks of capturing public interest through outsourcing.
Therefore, the PS defends: The establishment of competence centers in the different technical areas essential to planning, project assessment and supervision of the execution of infrastructures;
The creation of a center of competences for cost-benefit analysis, financial models and legal contracting, common to the State Administration as a whole;
Submitting multi-annual investment programs and highly relevant projects to a public hearing and discussion process;
The establishment of a Superior Public Works Council with plural representation designated by the CES, relevant professional orders, universities, Regions and Metropolitan Areas and environmental associations that issues a mandatory opinion on investment programs and projects of great relevance;
The submission, assessment and parliamentary approval, by a qualified majority of 2/3, of multi-annual investment programs, with express indication of the respective sources of financing;
The reintroduction of the role of legal auditors and the obligation to monitor the negotiations of the most relevant public procurement processes
The organization of the planning cycle according to the calendar of the EU financial perspective framework, therefore, with the 2014-2020 framework already in progress, and without prejudice to applying this methodology to the project phase, we must establish the following calendar for the period 2020-2027:
Planning, discussion, assessment and approval of the multi-annual program and any highly relevant projects until the end of 2018;
Negotiation and regulatory framework in the EU and preparation of projects in 2019 and 2020.
Improve the quality of public spending
The consolidation of public accounts requires clear improvements in the State's efficiency in terms of the use and management of resources by public administrations.
Rejecting the logic of blind cuts, decisions must be made based on cost and effectiveness criteria, and the factors that produce excessive or ineffective expenditure must be identified in their structural roots.
Currently, we are witnessing the waste of public resources, particularly in education and health.
In basic education, the latest estimate from the National Education Council points to 150,000 annual failures.
This means that around 600 million euros of expenditure does not have any positive counterpart.
In health, the value of expenditure caused by infections in hospitals is estimated at 300 million euros annually.
To overcome this reality and to substantially reduce this cost, it is necessary to establish infection eradication protocols that are widely applied in our hospitals.
Ideological prejudice and mismanagement have considerably affected the implementation of significantly cheaper organic solutions.
As an example, the current policy of hiring doctors through specialized companies not only means an absolutely exorbitant cost, but the qualification and commitment of the doctors hired is clearly lower.
Another glaring example practiced by the PSD-CDS government is the systematic use of external consultants.
In addition to this system being subject to absolutely undesirable conflicts of interest and providing a type of administration parallel to the Public Administration's own activity, its cost tends to be extremely high.
Another factor in excess public expenditure is associated with the opacity of the web of exemptions, deductions and other benefits that are being granted and the lack of crossover between them.
A clear example is the taxation of income on companies.
The IRC rate has already been lowered twice, but the structure of investment tax benefits remains to be revised, which could represent annual amounts of uncollected revenue close to one billion euros.
Finally, the failure to generalize cost-benefit analysis procedures to measures that involve public expenditure, namely investment expenditure, is another source of excess and inefficiency that needs to be addressed.
In fact, the PSD-CDS government leaves a dark record when it comes to non-compliance with the Court of Auditors' recommendations, and there too it is important to turn the page.
The PS government therefore proposes to carry out an exhaustive survey, in all ministries, of sources of unjustified generation of charges, as well as the identification of measures to rationalize and qualify expenditure.
3. GUARANTEE DEFENSE IN A WIDE TERRITORY
Sovereignty is an inherent attribute of the State and a foundation of National Security.
The PS proposes a National Defense Strategy that helps Portugal and the Portuguese to decide their sovereign future within the framework of interdependencies that they freely chose.
This is an irrefutable priority for the State, which will have to be combined with the prevailing economic and financial framework, which requires the establishment of clear priorities, centralizing investment in areas where intervention by the Armed Forces is most necessary.
The 21st century security environment is characterized by a multiplicity of unconventional, transnational and sub-state risks and threats, in which unpredictability is a determining factor.
In this context, planning and evaluation functions are relevant so that appropriate, feasible and acceptable measures can be taken in an area as sensitive as national sovereignty.
It is important to consider Defense Planning based on strategic information, aiming to match, at each moment, the response options available to the circumstances; and, concurrently, Force Planning that seeks to find the necessary capabilities to face the risks and threats that arise, whilst taking into account existing constraints.
National Defense has a transversal nature to society, but the Armed Forces are determining pillars, as they provide essential services to the affirmation of Portugal as a sovereign state, the well-being of citizens and democracy.
Its efficiency and effectiveness are very important and do not just depend on the equipment at your disposal.
The motivation of the soldiers who serve in them also has significance, given the level of demand associated with the missions assigned to them.
The PS will ensure the modernization of the Armed Forces and will also value the exercise of functions in the area of ​​National Defense, the dignification of former combatants and support for the families of military personnel on external missions.
Improve the efficiency of the Armed Forces
National defense, with its main objectives guaranteeing the sovereignty of the State, national independence and the integrity of the territory as well as ensuring the freedom and security of populations and the protection of the fundamental values ​​of the constitutional order, finds an instrument in the action of the Armed Forces essential aspect of foreign policy, particularly in the context of NATO, the EU, the UN and the CPLP.
The PS will seek to adapt its operations, maximizing the usefulness of available resources, channeling them to satisfy the main priorities, namely:
Focusing the action of the Armed Forces on the responses defined by demanding defense planning, particularly in areas of clear added value for the country
and, also, in fulfilling international commitments, in particular in participating in international peace missions;
Strengthening the fight against cyberterrorism, through the Armed Forces' cybersecurity unit, especially with regard to responses to attacks on military targets, and promoting cooperation and coordination mechanisms with other services to combat cybercrime;
Carrying out equipment acquisition and modernization programs in accordance with the calendar set out in the Military Programming Law;
Programming, in the medium term, selective investment in appropriate equipment, especially that which translates into a multiplier effect on operational capacity, investing in joint programs and those capable of dual use (civil and military);
Reorganizing the territorial device according to the identified missions and the maintenance of an effective operational capacity;
Consolidating sharing mechanisms between branches, giving priority to support and logistics areas, with a view to joint use from a perspective of complementarity and rationality;
Ensuring the stability of staff, after adequate planning, with regard to organic staff;
Ensuring the maintenance and support of resources, within existing constraints and budgetary commitments assumed.
Stimulate the Defense Industry
The existence of a Defense industry is crucial for the effective autonomy and ability to fulfill the missions of the Armed Forces.
On the other hand, Defense industries are, nowadays, associated with technologies with high added value, export capacity and creation of qualified jobs.
Therefore, the PS will seek to: Streamline the role of the State in managing public participation in the sector and as an agent facilitating the internationalization of the defense industry;
Promote dynamic capacity management, with the sale of equipment that is about to reach its use cycle or surplus, with a view to obtaining resources to be used in LPM and in support programs for the defense industry;
Promote the participation of the National Defense industry to participate in joint programs, focusing on niches of excellence within the scope of the European Defense Agency, NATO and other cooperative programs.
Value the exercise of functions in the area of ​​Defense
The PS will adopt the necessary measures to recognize the specificity of the exercise of functions in the area of ​​National Defense, namely:
Implementing the medium-term contract regime for functional situations whose level of education and training, type of academic qualifications and technical requirements make a guarantee of longer service provision desirable;
Completing the process of installing the Armed Forces Hospital and improving the healthcare provided there;
Maintaining sickness assistance for military personnel as an autonomous subsystem;
Stabilizing the statutory framework for the military, recognizing the specificity of their condition, especially that of disabled members of the Armed Forces and Former Combatants;
Ensuring the application, in Defense institutions, of the National Action Plan for the implementation of resolution UNSC1325 on Women, Peace and Security and promoting its continuous monitoring;
Creating support mechanisms for military families, particularly those of military personnel who died in service, and promoting the reconciliation of work and family life.
Qualify the Armed Forces and consolidate professionalization
Considering the importance of training and professional development of military personnel, the PS will adopt, in particular, the following measures:
Complementing specifically military training with the offer provided by the University and Polytechnic Higher Education system, in areas such as medicine, engineering and administration;
Promotion of alignment of training provided in the Armed Forces with the National Qualifications System (SNQ);
Effective promotion of the professional reintegration of military personnel under contract, using active training and employment policies, coordinated with the competent ministry.
Boost the external component of Defense
Alongside the historical and cultural ties that connect Portugal to the CPLP countries,
The geostrategic position of Portuguese territory and the new international environment restore Portugal's centrality across the Atlantic, at a time when the situation in the Mediterranean is also worsening.
The PS considers that this framework makes it possible to boost: The potential of the existing cooperation and defense agreement with the United States of America;
Technical-military cooperation, within the multilateral scope of the CPLP or at a bilateral level, maintaining and, if possible, expanding the cooperation programs in force with Portuguese-speaking countries
and launching new programs in the areas of training, training and defense industries.
Strengthen the connection between National Defense and the Portuguese
Bearing in mind the need to involve society in the debate on National Defense issues and to bring the Armed Forces closer to the Portuguese, the PS proposes to develop:
An action plan for a defense culture that will fit into National Defense Day
and will involve schools, local authorities and associations, valuing Defense and Armed Forces resources (museums, laboratories, libraries, archives, musical bands, sports equipment, monuments, magazines, newspapers and websites) in conjunction with the education sectors , science, culture, sport and tourism;
The strengthening of identity ties with Portuguese communities, continuing the contacts established between national forces on mission and Portuguese people living abroad.
4. HOMELAND SECURITY AND CRIMINAL POLICY
The PS notes that security threats and risks are increasingly global, diverse, complex and sophisticated.
This is what happens with human, arms and drug trafficking, terrorism, cybercrime and modern economic-financial crime.
New threats and new risks require a well-defined strategic orientation that is conducted in a coherent manner, through a policy based on a properly coordinated, effective and operational internal security system.
The prevention and repression of these phenomena also requires reinforced international cooperation and more effective coordination of security forces and services.
With this objective, the PS will increase the powers of the Secretary General of the Internal Security System, as an essential element in guaranteeing coherence, operability, eradication of redundancies, good coordination and integrated management of common functions of forces and services of security.
The best articulation is not, however, enough.
It will also be important to carry out operations that allow the evolution of information systems, the re-engineering of procedures and the reorganization of human resources, in order to, in particular, free up the greatest number of security forces elements for operational work.
With the aim of increasing effectiveness, while keeping costs under control, the sharing of resources between security forces and services will be encouraged
and improved investment planning, through the adoption of multi-annual plans aimed at meeting internal security priorities.
Concerned about criminal recidivism, the PS will seek to improve the sentence execution system,
as well as investing in true restorative justice and social reintegration, especially for younger people.
Establish strategic internal security guidelines in response to the main internal and external risks and threats
The PS considers it relevant to establish a clear strategic concept of internal security, to achieve the integrated objectives of national security, as well as the adoption of the following strategic guidelines within the scope of internal security:
The definition of a framework for international cooperation, taking into account the permanent interests of national security, especially within the scope of the European Union's Area of ​​Freedom, Security and Justice
and the CPLP.
It is also important to continue cooperation projects with the USA, European and African countries in the Mediterranean basin, as well as other bilateral and multilateral projects;
Continued development of an integrated strategy to prevent and combat terrorism, violent extremism, radicalization and recruitment, at national, European and international levels;
Taking into account that Portugal is an external border of the European Union, the affirmation of a border control policy based on the principle of solidarity,
in the creation of a European coast guard system and effective coordination and monitoring instruments,
for the purposes of combating crime, in particular aiding illegal immigration, trafficking in human beings, drugs and weapons, smuggling and counterfeiting;
The expansion of the responsibilities and resources of the National Cybersecurity Center, integrated in the fulfillment of the national strategy for cyberspace, preserving the security of infrastructures and fundamental rights, namely privacy, in conjunction with similar structures in the National Defense sector.
Modernize and rationalize the internal security system
It is important to continue modernizing the internal security system, in order to make it more effective and suitable to respond to current needs.
To this end, the PS will: Strengthen the powers of the Secretary General of the Internal Security System
and create a Command and Control Center, in order to guarantee coherence, operability,
the eradication of redundancies,
good coordination and integrated management of common functions within an institutional framework made up of a plurality of services and security forces;
Invest in information and communication technologies to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of operational activity,
strengthen access to operational information,
and improve the relationship between citizens and Security Forces and Services;
Significantly increase the number of security force elements in operational work, delimiting the perimeters of action that can be carried out by non-operational or administrative personnel;
Prepare a plan of interventions to be carried out within the infrastructure and equipment network, aiming at multi-annual planning for the investment area, for the rehabilitation of infrastructure and for the modernization of equipment, using community funds;
Restructure the education system of security forces and services, sharing information, knowledge, skills and resources.
This process will involve the curricular organization of common courses – at initial, intermediate and higher levels;
Within a framework of dialogue, recognizing the specificities of the police condition, pay special attention to the dignity of service agents and security forces.
Create a National Proximity Prevention and Safety Program and develop current programs
The PS will create a National Proximity Prevention and Security Program corresponding to a new generation of proximity policing actions, which will include the following measures:
Update and establish a new generation of Local Security Contracts;
Increase the training and role of Local Security Councils in creating more and better protection on a community scale, giving rise to renewed patrolling procedures;
Develop a specific prevention and securitization program for large metropolitan areas;
Update training plans and methodologies for proximity prevention and safety;
Ensure vertical and horizontal integration of various prevention and safety programs
and make the missions of the various bodies compatible with operational intervention on the ground – namely national police, municipal police, night guards and private security functions;
Promote the installation of video surveillance systems in risk areas;
Expand and reconfigure the vocation and intervention capabilities of commissions for the protection of children and young people at risk;
Improve and develop current programs in the areas of prevention and proximity security policies;
Ensure, in an integrated manner, the improvement of the police contribution to the prevention of domestic violence, particularly through special training for officers,
the increase in spaces reserved for assistance to victims,
the development of early risk screening mechanisms following complaints,
interaction with local monitoring and reception institutions.
Increase the prevention and control of serious, violent and highly organized crime
With the aim of promoting crime prevention and control, the PS government will promote:
Full compliance with legal obligations to keep criminal policy guidelines up to date, within a framework of strict respect for the principle of separation of powers;
The conditions, means and good coordination of criminal police bodies, under the guidance of the criminal action holder in the process, with emphasis on valuing the central role of the scientific police;
Intervention on phenomena of violence associated with shows and, particularly, sporting activities, with a special focus on dissuading manifestations of racism, xenophobia and intolerance, promoting civic behavior and tranquility in the enjoyment of public spaces;
The regular carrying out of special operations relating to the control of weapons and ammunition;
The promotion of proactive policies to prevent and investigate corruption, particularly through surveys of users of public services.
Improve the protection system for victims of crime and people at risk
The PS will improve the protection system for victims of violent crime and domestic violence, as well as people at risk, namely through:
Expansion of the status of victims of crime, going beyond that initiated in relation to victims of domestic violence,
and adopting a national action plan for its operationalization and implementation, from an integrated perspective of the justice, police, education, health and Social Security subsystems;
Reform of the Crime Victims Protection Commission and the legal framework for compensation to victims by the perpetrator and the State, with particular emphasis on situations of violence;
Progressive national coverage of crime victim support services;
Deepening the prevention and combat of gender-based and domestic violence, through a comprehensive national strategy, with local participation and integrated perspectives for a decade, in line with what is defined in the Istanbul Convention and the Convention on Trafficking in Human Beings ;
Increased electronic surveillance and teleassistance mechanisms to support victims of domestic violence;
Creation of a new regime of safeguard measures regarding the provisional regulation of parental responsibilities of individuals involved in domestic violence proceedings;
Creation of a network of safe spaces for assisted visits and delivery of children and young people within the scope of parental responsibility regimes;
Adaptation of the Commissions for the Protection of Children and Young People, so that they can carry out functions to protect people at risk.
Create true restorative justice, improve the system for executing sentences and precautionary measures and valuing social reintegration
The PS believes that serving sentences, whatever their nature, must have a genuinely resocializing function.
In this sense, the PS will adopt measures to develop true restorative justice, as well as to improve the system for executing sentences, precautionary measures and social reintegration, with the aim of, in particular:
Evaluate the application of restorative justice instruments and expand their use, making it mandatory in the preliminary phase in juvenile justice;
Review the concepts of prison for free days and other short-term sentences, in low-risk cases, intensifying evidentiary solutions;
Admit the use of a continuous sentence of imprisonment in housing with electronic surveillance, in judicially determined cases, with the possibility of going out to work, if necessary;
Review the regime for criminally imputable young people between the ages of 16 and 21, aiming at general and special prevention with the objectives of their resocialization;
Develop and begin implementing a plan, with a horizon of a decade, with the objective of rationalizing and modernizing the network of prison establishments and adjusting the national network of educational centers;
Combat overcrowding in prisons,
ensure the safety and sanitary environment and
promote reception compatible with human dignity, adequate treatment of young adults, pre-trial detainees and primary inmates;
Ensure health care, especially in situations of drug addiction and infectious diseases;
Ensure education and training compatible with the educational levels and vocation of prisoners;
Reduce, whenever security reasons allow, the time spent daily by inmates in the cell or ward, engaging them in multidisciplinary activities;
Ensure adequate levels of provision of information and social support to families who particularly need it;
Promote the provision of support to ex-prisoners, in the first years of their freedom, particularly in the form of exit homes, access to social insertion income and help in finding work;
Strengthen the response of the national electronic surveillance system, particularly in the execution of short-term prison sentences, in the conditions of application of parole associated, if necessary, with other types of interventions, particularly of a therapeutic nature, in the field of application of measures of coercion, as well as surveillance of aggressors in cases of domestic violence.
Prevent recidivism
The PS will invest in preventing recidivism, namely through the following initiatives:
Special attention to the demands of the educational guardianship function, particularly in terms of resocialization and social reintegration programs in conjunction with the families of young delinquents;
Investment in the professional training of prisoners and in prison work, for fair remuneration;
Attracting more private contracting and boosting entrepreneurship in penitentiary economic zones, increasing the supply of work in prison;
Creation of the Regime of Individual Contracts for Training, Reintegration and Work in Prison, encouraging inmates to adhere to individual readaptation plans that include the provision of work and professional training;
Expansion of professional skills in all prison establishments, focusing on the creation of new productive units of a business nature, meeting the needs of the employment market and the respective socio-geographical insertion;
Promoting a pool of job offers for the period after serving a prison sentence, reinforcing social support for reintegration into active life;
Deepening the relationship between penitentiary entities with local communities and the business sector, creating a “Community Council” in each prison establishment, with representation from local authorities, companies, local institutions and the inmates themselves.
Improve the efficiency of civil protection and prevention and relief conditions
PS will promote the increase in the efficiency of civil protection and the conditions for prevention and relief in the face of accidents and catastrophes, namely through the following actions:
Consolidation of the National Civil Protection System, clarifying the competencies of political, coordination and operational authorities at national, regional, district and municipal levels;
Implementation of the Permanent Operational Directive, at all levels of the civil protection system (national, regional, district and municipal);
Operational and territorial framework of the Protection and Relief Intervention Group (GIPS) of the GNR and the Special Fire Force (FEB) of the National Civil Protection Authority, ensuring greater flexibility and intervention capacity of the rescue operations device and the necessary levels of readiness and mobilization, throughout the year, depending on alert levels and the effective occurrence of emergency and civil protection situations;
Strengthening the municipal level of the civil protection system;
Valuing associations and volunteer fire departments, as true pillars of the protection and relief system in Portugal,
through strengthening incentives for volunteering,
support for operation and equipment and the full use of operational and command capabilities;
Development and implementation of risk monitoring, warning and early warning systems, particularly in cooperation with universities and research centers, in the face of different emergency situations;
Development of information systems to support operational decisions, with the georeferencing of operational resources and the development of video surveillance systems;
Increasing resilience in the territory, minimizing the risks associated with the occurrence of serious accidents and catastrophes, through territorial planning instruments, as well as interventions in forests, on the coast and in cities;
Modernization of infrastructure and equipment and training of civil protection agents;
Deepening the conditions for coordination and articulation of the various aspects of civil protection, with emphasis on civil emergency planning;
Creation of a training program for self-protection and the creation of disaster-resilient communities;
Update of the civil protection legal regime;
Identification of forms of permanent coordination between the Civil Protection System and the Armed Forces.
Promote road safety and reduce accidents
The PS will update and develop the National Strategy for Road Safety, to be applied in the period 2016-2022, through a global assessment of the results achieved in risk groups and the effectiveness of corrective measures for risk factors in the road environment.
The PS will, in particular: Encourage all Portuguese municipalities to develop and approve their respective Municipal Road Safety Plans, fundamental instruments for promoting road safety in areas of urban agglomerations;
Implement and expand the National Automatic Speed ​​Inspection Network (SINCRO);
Improve coordination and sharing of information between all entities with information about vehicles or their owners and drivers and security forces;
Strengthen “black spot” signaling measures and increase auditing and inspection actions on road safety conditions;
Develop a National Plan to Protect Pedestrian Circulation and Combat Run-overs;
Develop more effective awareness campaigns against risky behavior in the road environment and implement a national distribution program, at a symbolic cost, of disposable alcohol control devices in night-time environments.
5. SPEED UP JUSTICE
The PSD/CDS government's policy in the area of ​​Justice was characterized by five negative factors.
Firstly, due to the total inability to govern without violating the Constitution.
Secondly, due to the constant disrespect for fundamental rights, with legislative interventions that are barely acceptable in a modern State of Law.
Thirdly, due to a lack of political guidance, preferring to follow the path of major legislative reforms of codes without a clear and structured political option.
Then, fourthly, due to the inability and incompetence in the preparation of political measures, well reflected in the collapse of CITIUS and the hasty assembly of the judicial map, with courts installed in containers.
Finally, the PSD/CDS government forgot citizens and companies as users of justice services, preferring instead a governance focused solely on the legal professions.
The PS recognizes that citizens and companies are not satisfied with the public justice service they have.
This dissatisfaction essentially results from the fact that they consider the judicial response to be excessively slow, blaming the congestion of the courts for this fact.
For their part, judicial actors repeatedly state that this congestion results from growing demand, associated with a lack of resources.
The PS cannot fail to note that, over the last two decades, the number of cases filed has been constant, whilst, during the same period, there has been a very significant increase in human and material resources serving the justice system.
A different approach is therefore necessary: ​​Justice needs a management shock, decongestion, dematerialization and procedural simplification.
Furthermore, for citizens and companies to feel more satisfied with the system, it is necessary that, alongside an intervention aimed at increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of Justice,
there is a clear investment in improving your service,
but also its image among users and public opinion.
This is what the PS government proposes to do.
Apply a “management shock” to the judicial system
The PS considers that the public justice service has a management deficit, and the various public entities that manage the system must exercise their powers in a more coordinated and user-oriented way.
To promote improved performance of the judicial system, the PS will promote a “management shock”, applying, in particular, the following measures:
The establishment of a “contract for a public justice service”, which sets quantified goals for the judicial system and for each court, in order to generate guidelines and set public, transparent and scrutinizable objectives for reducing process deadlines.
This contract must be signed by those responsible for the area of ​​Justice and the structures responsible for managing magistrates, with the participation of the Economic and Social Council;
The implementation of a regime of incentives for the productivity of court teams that meet previously established performance targets, thus seeking to increase procedural speed;
The development of court management and procedural management capacity, through strengthening the powers and means of management of district and court presidents, management training, the establishment of good practices that can be shared between districts and the possible recruitment of professionals in the field management;
The development and provision of IT tools for court management, namely monitoring procedural workload and human resources management;
Possibility of distributing, within the scope of civil justice, procedural acts to courts with less procedural burden, based on objective and transparent criteria that satisfy the requirements of the natural judge;
The institutionalization of a regime for the placement and movement of magistrates capable of providing stability and the performance of functions within the time horizon necessary for good management of processes.
Promote the decongestion of courts
In areas or jurisdictions with greater pending issues, the PS will apply general programs to diversify the supply of justice or those aimed at exceptional situations of judicial congestion, aiming not only at short-term intervention, but also at preventing case accumulation scenarios. , namely:
The creation of the possibility of obtaining a declaration proving the uncollectibility of VAT, without recourse to the courts, in cases where this method does not yet exist;
The establishment of a new means of verifying a reality, certifying a factual situation with probative value, in order to encourage the resolution of a dispute without recourse to the courts;
The creation of conditions for the establishment of offices of judicial advisors and rapid intervention teams, to assist the service of the courts, supporting the production of judicial decisions in the first instance, in courts with high demand or involved in highly complex cases.
The allocation of these offices will be managed in a national, flexible and appropriate way to the needs of the courts at any given time;
The expansion of the possibilities for procedural aggregation, in order to ensure faster and fairer treatment of cases in conditions of being able to benefit from this regime;
Expanding the jurisdiction and network of justices of the peace, as well as mediation and arbitration centers;
Limiting the possibility of a dispute between public legal entities being settled through the courts, imposing a minimum value on cases, encouraging pre-payments and encouraging the use of mediation or arbitration;
The general adherence of State Administration entities to the jurisdiction of existing administrative arbitration centers, thus allowing for faster and cheaper adjudication of disputes between citizens and companies and public entities, particularly in matters of public procurement, public service and litigation regarding the use of community funds, without prejudice to exclusions motivated by security and defense issues;
Investment in incentives to prevent conflict or the use of alternative means, especially in the context of neighborhood relations, family relations, inheritances and in cases of over-indebtedness, through, in particular, the establishment of mandatory alternative processes and the establishment of rules that hold creditor and debtor jointly responsible when non-compliance with a contract is foreseeable on the part of the creditor;
The imposition of disputes arising from contracts for the supply of television, telecommunications and Internet services,
as well as the supply of electricity, water and gas, will now be subject to mandatory arbitration, and the costs of using arbitration for the consumer cannot exceed 5% of the IAS value per share;
The implementation of a pilot experience of referral to an agreed resolution based on the judicial process, giving the possibility that, when a judicial process begins, the judge promotes its resolution through a court of peace, mediation center or center arbitration associated with the court, with the advantage of time and associated costs (multi-door court model).
Simplify and dematerialize legal processes
In order for processes to be resolved more quickly, the PS will invest in simplifying procedures and work habits,
as well as in the modernization of IT tools for procedural processing, adopting, in particular, the following initiatives:
Solving problems and developing a new version of the CITIUS procedural management system, including new functionalities, tending towards the use of a single procedural management application in all jurisdictions;
Procedural simplification, with reduction of redundant, useless or non-value-added procedural acts,
rethinking the role of various agents and eliminating non-essential interventions;
Assessment of the possibility of a radical innovation in civil procedural culture, with a pilot civil procedure regime reduced to basic standards and allowing dynamic management of the process by the judge;
Improving search functionality and making jurisprudence available on the Internet, promoting the dissemination of all rulings;
The establishment of a model for the parameterization of procedures and necessary documentary support in the court, in order to simplify and clarify procedures and improve the coordination of the work of magistrates and the judicial secretariat;
The assessment of the possibility of changing the rules for taking evidence, in order to promote their simplification and speed, allowing, for example, the extension of the possibility of witness testimony being given in writing, with agreement between the parties;
Changing the rules of service, through the consecration of a legal address,
the creation of a public list of absent defendants and the elimination of public notice whenever justified,
reinforcing, on the other hand, the mechanisms for challenging sentences handed down in absentia due to non-culpable ignorance of the action;
The review of the insolvency regime, removing merely administrative acts from the judge and making the claim of credits credible
and setting special requirements for public entities when they make a PER unfeasible given the existence of a majority of common creditors expressing their agreement.
Bringing justice closer to citizens
In order for the Justice system to improve its relationship with users and the community, the PS will invest in improving transparency, communication and treatment of procedural actors, adopting, in particular, the following initiatives:
Correcting errors in the execution of the judicial map by promoting the necessary changes, without prejudice to providing trials in each municipality that respect the citizens of that same municipality;
The creation of a justice portal on the Internet, with useful information, from the perspective of a citizen or a company, about courts and other justice services and their costs, as well as about extrajudicial means of resolving disputes and legal aid , among other areas;
The introduction of user information mechanisms, particularly in citations and notifications, with an indication of the expected average duration of the ongoing process;
The provision of a customer service service for court users, providing information about their cases (location, responsible judge and secretary, average duration of the type of case in the court, status of the case, etc.), favoring multichannel access;
The simplification of language in fundamental procedural acts, such as citations and notifications, in order to facilitate understanding by most citizens, also making references to legal provisions explicit.
The periodic preparation of surveys of civil servants and users of public justice services and the carrying out of tests using mystery shoppers in public services, with subsequent dissemination of the results;
Encouraging the adoption of good practices in scheduling the interview of witnesses, through the designation of different times for the respective hearing and the creation of the possibility of telephone notification when the witness is absent or it is found that the scheduled time will not be met;
Encouraging the implementation of technological means so that, as an alternative to going to court, trials can take place via videoconference, with the agreement of the parties, especially when they involve traveling outside the district;
Assessment of the effectiveness of the offer and the adjustment of the network of legal consultancy offices, in order to promote access to qualified legal information, especially in areas or among groups that reveal more weaknesses in access to the law, in collaboration with local authorities , the Bar Association and the Chamber of Solicitors.
Improve the quality of the public justice service
In general, the PS will promote the improvement of the quality of the public justice service, adopting all measures that are appropriate to achieve this objective, such as:
The adoption of substantive and procedural measures necessary to ensure a speedy decision on matters that are important to citizens and that currently require effective resolution, such as provisional maintenance, regulation of the exercise of parental responsibilities and authorization or confirmation of certain acts relating to minors;
The opening of the exercise of specialized judge functions to jurists or university professors, through a special access regime, in areas or jurisdictions in which the judicial system lacks adequate resources;
The establishment of mechanisms for faster identification of situations of doubt or divergent application by the different courts using specific procedural mechanisms that aim to minimize these divergences or eliminate them quickly;
Strengthening specialized training for magistrates and court officials in relevant areas of current legal practice or those associated with increasing the efficiency of judicial work, namely through the use of distance training mechanisms;
The promotion of specialized joint training of trainers from all legal professions, in order to ensure their uniformity;
Improve the quality of access to the legal aid system in order to provide a better service to those who need it.
6. STRENGTHEN, SIMPLIFY AND DIGITALIZE ADMINISTRATION
SIMPLEX is a brand that the PS gave to the country and that, for several years, helped to unite politicians, agents and public servants around the common purpose of making Portugal a State that, being more efficient, made life easier for citizens and the companies.
It is time to restart the process of modernization of Public Administration that was halted during the period of PSD/CDS governance and return our country to European leadership in terms of e-government and administrative simplification.
The PS intends to launch a new SIMPLEX program that, like the previous ones, promotes the improvement of citizens' relationships with the Public Administration and the reduction of context costs for companies.
This program will include, in particular, new one-stop shops where it will be possible to deal with various everyday matters, organized according to the needs of users, such as a one-stop shop for questions relating to vehicles, or the One-Stop Employment Shop.
A modern Public Administration cannot only look outward: it must also look inward and seek to improve the provision of public services, while spending less.
The PS is concerned with the efficiency of Public Administration and, therefore, will promote, among many other measures, the sharing of services and resources and the improvement of management instruments for public leaders.
Finally, it is necessary to value the exercise of public functions, contrary to what has been done in recent years.
The PSD/CDS government pitted private sector workers against public servants and began a process of stripping them of income and rights that only the intervention of the Constitutional Court was able to slow down.
The PS will seek to revalue public servants and the exercise of functions in Public Administration.
Extend and renew Simplex to the entire public sector
The PS government will resume the Simplex program for the entire central, regional and local public sector, with joint measures for the three levels of administration, involving both participating public entities and their users.
The Simplex program will include, namely, the following actions and measures, giving priority to measures to simplify processes related to the provision of healthcare by the National Health Service:
Creation of “one-stop shops” that avoid multiple trips to resolve the same issue and delivery of the same documents to different public entities such as:
“One stop shop for employment” with integrated services relating to: job search, worker support, business support, professional training, work outside the country and unemployment;
“Single Property Information”, integrating information from territorial and urban planning, land registration and cadastre;
Single website for fulfilling companies’ reporting obligations to different public entities;
“Change address once”, submitting a request to change address, all at once, in several documents and for other mandatory purposes;
“About Wheels”, with information in a single point on all transactions and procedures relating to the issuance and revalidation of driving licenses, car scrapping, vehicle registration, inspections, payment of road tax, as well as procedures relating to administrative offences.
Use of simple technologies, such as mobile phones, to facilitate citizens' relationships with public services, creating services such as:
“Documents always valid”, with automatic notifications via email or SMS about the end of validity of documents, or deadline for fulfilling obligations;
“Pensão a Par e Passo”, a simulator that will allow you to consult the value of the future pension on the Internet, in light of the legal rules in force.
Provision of services to its users, such as the “Be wherever you are” desk, which aims to provide public services to senior citizens, giving priority to services relating to Social Security, pensions and social support;
Simplification of access to relevant data, namely by generalizing the permanent certificate model for the purposes of proving a certain fact, such as attendance and obtaining an academic degree in higher education;
Opening of public data that allows the development of services with added social value, for example, data that reveals the cost of public services or that is relevant for investment decisions in Portugal;
Assessment of user satisfaction with public services and establishment of indicators to improve quality in areas with lower scores;
Implement the fundamental principle that citizens and companies do not have to provide documents or repeat information already made available to any administration services;
Reduce, to the extent of the savings generated, the costs of registering people's lives (marriage, divorce, citizenship card, etc.) and companies (creation of companies, change of managers, accountability, change of statutes, registration brands, etc.).
Promote innovation in the public sector
Innovation allows us to find new formats for providing public services, in more effective and efficient terms, and experimentation helps to reduce the risk inherent in change processes.
The PS intends to restart the process, interrupted in 2011, of developing an environment of permanent innovation in the public sector, namely through the following initiatives:
The creation of an incubator to test innovative projects in Public Administration that are proposed by public entities, research centers, private companies or social sector entities;
The introduction of a “right to challenge” mechanism, allowing organizations (schools, hospitals, local governments and other public entities) the right to be exempt from complying with a certain regime, for a certain period, in order to try out a new procedure that , after due assessment, can be extended to other entities under the same conditions;
The creation of a public fund grant, possibly with a component co-financed by community funds, to reward innovative projects in the public sector;
The establishment of a bonus system for workers or groups of workers who contribute to innovation in Public Administration;
The creation of “competence centers” that technically support ministries and provide transversal services to Public Administration, preferably using existing structures and employees;
The implementation of the project “Leave your idea here”, based on a digital platform for “Open Administration” that allows innovative ideas to be collected from citizens and helps to define priorities for their development.
Value the exercise of public functions
The PS recognizes that one of the hallmarks of PSD/CDS governance is the massacre of the public service.
It is therefore urgent to redefine the exercise of public functions.
With this objective, the PS will adopt the following measures: The elimination of the salary reduction for public employees, in force since OE2011, in 2 years through the suppression of salary cuts by 40% in 2016 and the remaining part in 2017;
The return to the normal 35-hour working week regime for workers in public functions without implying an increase in overall personnel costs;
Start in 2018 the process of unfreezing careers and limiting real losses in remuneration, which should be assessed taking into account the transversal impact of some careers in various budget programs;
The adoption of rewards for good management and the replacement of incentives for human resources, within the framework of the services' budgetary capabilities;
The injection of “new blood” into Public Administration through the launch of national competitions for young higher-level professional staff that allows them to be linked to Public Administration in general, without belonging to a specific service, department or institute, as well as raising the mass critical and strategic planning capabilities in Public Administration;
Integrated management of the number of workers in the public sector, ensuring that the admission of new workers does not mean an increase in their total aggregate number;
The adoption of a more flexible model in the provision of work within the scope of the General Labor Law in Public Functions, namely, through the promotion of teleworking, part-time, and autonomy for workers in managing their weekly and monthly hours
The adoption of a new system of continuous and integrated training, taking into account the profile of public workers and the needs of services, namely through protocols with higher education institutions;
Review of the “requalification” regime for workers in public functions, in particular favoring a voluntary mobility regime for workers to other Public Administration services with proven personnel needs, without excluding the adoption of special incentives for this purpose;
Promoting the movement of public servants between services in other Member States and community and international institutions;
Promoting the transfer of professional experience of public servants, through the participation of public servants, including retired civil servants, in the Common Knowledge Network, with the aim of encouraging the sharing of good practices and know-how.
Simplify public management
Public Administration can be better managed if public management is simplified. To this end, the PS will adopt the following measures:
The admission of autonomous budget management by the heads of Public Administration services, in accordance with previously established objectives and subject to a mid-term evaluation that associates the availability of the budget with the level of performance;
Promotion of the matrix organization model;
Making the creation and extinction of internal organic units more flexible, increasing the degree of responsibility and decision-making capacity of the service's top manager.
Modernize and rationalize public spending
Public procurement will be used as one of the essential instruments for the efficiency of Public Administration. With this objective, the PS will promote:
The introduction of necessary changes to the public procurement model to simplify procedures and reduce costs for companies and public services;
The generalization of the use of electronic public procurement in all phases of pre-contractual procedures;
The improvement of shared public procurement services, namely through better coordination between central and sectoral entities;
The creation of a network of shared services, coordinating central entities, such as ESPAP and INA, and sectoral contact points, located in the general secretariats of ministries and in specific units of other Public Administration entities;
The obligation for public entities subject to public procurement regimes to disclose an indicative annual plan relating to the public procurement actions they will carry out, so that economic agents can plan their participation in the medium term;
The creation of the “Public Assets” Program, based on a network management program for public assets (real estate and furniture), combining several asset management tools into a single platform that allows all public services to determine the State's availability.
7. ENSURE EFFECTIVE REGULATION OF MARKETS
Regulation was, in most developed economies, the answer found to try to overcome market failures, which tend to be more present as private agents gained predominance in relevant economic sectors.
The importance of regulation is, therefore, not only related to the adequate provision of essential goods for a society that wishes to be cohesive,
but also – particularly in the case of regulation of the financial sector – with the objective of macroeconomic stability, essential for balanced and healthy growth that translates into the well-being of citizens.
Recent years have been marked by an international environment characterized by the global financial crisis of 2007/2008, which created significant pressures originating in the financial sector, but with severe consequences for the real economy and for States, including the sovereign debt crisis.
These crises have highlighted several flaws in supervision and regulation, resulting in direct and indirect damage to the economy, to the increasingly pressured public finances and above all to citizens, as well as to the credibility and reputation of the various regulatory entities.
In this light, the PS considers it essential to invest in strengthening the effectiveness of national regulatory and supervisory entities.
In addition to an increase in supervisory intensity, regulation must adopt a proactive and, above all, preventive attitude.
This is especially the case with regard to the financial sector, where it is necessary to combat certain promiscuities and interdependent relationships which, from a prudential perspective, involve aggravated risk factors.
All this without jeopardizing the rights of consumers of financial products and services and without creating a regulatory environment focused on bureaucratic requirements that create contextual costs that do not focus on effective supervision.
Reorganize regulatory and supervisory functions
The reorganization of regulation and supervision functions will provide these activities with greater rationality, creating a system that is simultaneously more effective and with fewer overlaps or redundancies,
as well as eliminating bureaucratic requirements that blur regulatory activity from its essential functions.
This reorganization must involve strengthening the regulatory entities' capacity to act, sectoral regulation tending to be based on the single regulator model and the consequent consideration, necessarily on a case-by-case basis, of merger movements between regulators that act on the same economic activity.
The objectives of this reorganization are: To provide regulatory entities with a greater capacity for supervision and intervention, particularly preventive, in terms of verifying suitability (with the possibility of suspension of functions when there is evidence of the practice of serious illegal acts), avoiding practices of harmful management, defense of competition and consumer protection;
Ensure the allocation of the necessary means for effective regulation/supervision, through efficiency gains and synergies;
Reduce the dispersion of skills and improve coordination, collaboration and exchange of information between regulatory/supervisory entities, reducing conflicts of interest between different entities and between different functions;
Proceed with the identification and elimination of excessive bureaucratic requirements on the part of regulators, eliminating them and concentrating regulatory activity on those that are their essential functions;
Carry out a reduction in management positions that harm regulatory action by dispersing competencies that should be concentrated in single managers, as well as requiring that the selection of these managers be preceded by a competition and other mechanisms that ensure the transparency of appointments.
Strengthen the independence of regulators and supervisors vis-à-vis regulated sectors
The independence of regulators and supervisors from the regulated sectors is essential for the effective and transparent exercise of their respective functions.
Increasing the guarantees of suitability, integrity, impartiality and impartiality can be achieved through improving the regime of incompatibilities and impediments in relation to members of the respective corporate bodies, as well as those holding management positions and other employees. Thus, the PS will act to:
Strengthen ex-ante and ex-post impediments, in order to stop the rotation of workers between regulatory entities and regulated companies or relevant service providers to these entities (revolving doors).
Specifically, the recruitment of regulators from regulated companies will be limited, the maintenance of suspended employment relationships with regulated companies during the exercise of regulatory positions will be prevented and ex-post impediments (known as “disgust period”) will be applied to all regulatory entities, without exception;
Establish a stricter regime regarding the holding of shares or trading of financial instruments related to the sector in question;
Enshrine the mandatory completion and scrutiny of periodic declarations regarding potential conflicts of interest;
Give the Assembly of the Republic a relevant role in quantifying objectives and evaluating the results obtained by regulatory entities, thus increasing the rigor, demand, visibility and transparency of their respective actions;
Ensure that the financing of regulatory entities is based on self-sufficiency parameters, through own revenues derived from regulatory contributions and/or supervisory fees.
Prevent promiscuity and other abuses in the financial sector
Supervision of the financial sector must not only ensure tighter supervision of credit institutions,
how to avoid, from the outset, the occurrence of situations of economic capture, conflicts of interest and interdependencies that increase systemic risk.
Furthermore, it is also up to regulation to prevent abuses, burdens or excessive charges imposed on customers of financial products and services. To this end, the PS will:
Establish limits on the successive renewal of mandates for statutory auditors and external auditors of credit institutions;
Provide for the mandatory creation, in credit institutions, of a risk committee and an integrity and transparency committee, composed of independent members, with a view to monitoring their performance and preventing and resolving possible conflicts of interest;
Mandate the identification of the ultimate economic beneficiaries of qualified holdings in credit institutions;
Mandate the disclosure of all credit granting operations (or similar) to members of corporate bodies and holders of qualified shares in credit institutions;
Limit the exercise of non-financial activities by credit institutions, segregating the exercise of the activity of receiving deposits with a view to increasing their protection;
Strengthen the standardization of pre-contractual information linked to the offer of financial instruments to non-professional clients,
imposing restrictions on the sale of financial products whenever this constitutes a loss for the customer and penalizing any bad commercial practices on the part of financial institutions;
Prevent abuses and excesses in placing people on the Banco de Portugal blacklist and speed up procedures with a view to removing them from that list;
Set limits on the value of commissions charged by banks;
Stop bureaucratic excesses when opening and, above all, closing bank accounts;
Require that the possibility of carrying out financial, insurance or other activities involving licenses or authorizations depends on the acceptance of the jurisdiction of arbitration centers that adjudicate disputes with consumers quickly and cheaply in relation to the services provided.
8. VALUE THE AUTONOMY OF AUTONOMOUS REGIONS
In 2016, forty years have passed since the date on which this model of political decentralization, which we call political-administrative autonomy, was written into the Constitution of the Republic.
Today, as then in the Constituent Assembly, the PS proudly assumes its role as the party of regional autonomies,
and recognizes the need to open a new cycle in the State's relationship with the autonomous regions of the Azores and Madeira.
There is an imperative need, not only to reconcile the country with this reality, but, above all, to mobilize the autonomous regions to a new level of relationship and sharing of responsibilities for the benefit, and for a more effective implementation, of the foundational objectives of the experience autonomic:
the democratic participation of citizens, economic-social development and the promotion and defense of regional interests, as well as the strengthening of national unity and bonds of solidarity between all Portuguese.
To this end, there are some guidelines for action by the next government, under the responsibility of the Socialist Party, which are worth mentioning:
Regional autonomies exist, from the outset, in the interests of the State itself.
They are also the way in which, in the territory of the Azores and Madeira archipelagos, the State organizes itself to better provide for the achievement of its purposes.
It follows that it is time to overcome an overly reductive and simplistic perspective of the potential and role that autonomous regions can play.
To a vision that bases the relationship between the State and regional autonomies on antinomy, the PS proposes a vision of complementarity, concertation and contractualization.
It is from this vision that not only new horizons are opened for the action of autonomous regions, but better conditions are guaranteed for more effective and concrete intervention by the State.
In this context, human and material resources are particularly important to ensure, in this part of the national territory, the functions of the State;
Whether in the area of ​​the administration of Justice, in the area of ​​Security, or even with regard to the Armed Forces, it is necessary to quickly reverse the course of disinvestment and degradation of conditions for the exercise of these functions;
This is not a question of regional autonomies.
This is an obligation of a State worthy of the name;
The State must assume the pedagogy of regional autonomies.
Despite forty years having passed since the consecration of regional autonomies, the fact is that they remain something unknown and, we would even say, misunderstood, for the majority of Portuguese society.
The way in which this situation can be overcome involves calling on the autonomous regions to renew and visible participation in matters that matter to the country as a whole.
In some cases, what becomes necessary is simply to fulfill what the PSD/CDS-PP government has demonstrated that it is unable to fulfill, as is the case, for example, of calling on the autonomous regions to participate in the construction process European level and even integrate them into national delegations involved in decision-making processes at European level;
The autonomous regions constitute the country's assets whose appreciation is necessary.
In this new relationship that the next government led by the PS intends to promote with the autonomous regions, their valorization as the country's assets is one of the objectives that we believe is necessary.
One of the processes in which this appreciation is most evident is that which has to do with the extension of the Portuguese continental shelf, which is currently under analysis at the United Nations.
It is the Portuguese archipelagos, especially the Azores, that give consistency and dimension to this Portuguese claim, and it is the autonomous regions that constitute essential interlocutors for a better implementation of the national competences that will affect it.
This is one of the areas in which the existence of autonomous regions should not be seen as competitive or an obstacle to State action, but rather as a means par excellence for its effective operationalization;
Another area in which the valorization of the actions of the autonomous regions will also benefit the State is the use of the enormous potential contained in the privileged relationship that the autonomous regions have with foreign infra-state entities, such as provinces, states federated, among others.
In these cases, the contractualization and mobilization of national resources in favor of these privileged relationships that, on an economic, political or cultural level, autonomous regions can develop, is a path that must be followed and whose benefits accrue to the entire country.
9. DECENTRALIZATION, BASIS OF STATE REFORM
For the PS, it is urgent to carry out a transformation in the State's operating model.
Starting with the structures that constitute its base, the PS will reinforce and deepen local autonomy, focusing on increasing the legitimization of local authorities and Regional Coordination and Development Commissions (CCDR),
opening doors to the desired transfer of State powers to bodies closer to the people.
This decentralization will be rationalizing, based on the principle of subsidiarity and always taking into account the best interests of citizens and companies that require an agile and adequate response from the Public Administration.
Thus, the PS will invest in the creation of a widespread network of public services nearby.
However, any reform in this area can only be achieved with the appropriate allocation of resources that allow the full exercise of the new skills to be transferred.
In this sense, the PS will adapt the local financing rules according to the new reality that people and institutions will be faced with.
Thus, the new coherent territorial model implemented by the PS will be based on five regions of planning and territorial development, corresponding to the areas of intervention of the CCDR,
in the creation of metropolitan authorities,
in promoting intermunicipal cooperation through intermunicipal communities,
in the decentralization of universal public service management powers to municipalities
and in affirming the role of parishes as centers of proximity democracy and equal access to public services.
Deepen local democracy
The PS considers that the transfer of competences to bodies with greater proximity must be accompanied by greater democratic legitimacy of these bodies, namely based on the following measures:
The democratization of the CCDR organization model, establishing the election of the respective executive body by an electoral college formed by members of the chambers and municipal assemblies (including the presidents of parish councils) in the area of ​​intervention, with the executive body of the CCDR, with 3 to 5 members, before the Regional Council and the functions being carried out in a regime that is incompatible with any other political or administrative functions of a national or autonomous nature;
The transformation of current metropolitan areas, reinforcing their democratic legitimacy, with directly elected bodies, with the Metropolitan Assembly being elected by direct vote of the voting citizens, the President of the executive body being the first elected from the most voted list and the remaining members of the body elected by the metropolitan assembly, upon proposal from the president;
The promotion of more democratic, scrutinized and transparent local governance, through the strengthening of the powers of political oversight of municipal assemblies, which will be responsible for electing the municipal council, on the proposal of the president, who will be the first member of the list with the most votes.
The municipal executives, which will have between 3 and 11 members, will respond politically to the municipal assembly, which will have reinforced oversight powers.
Strengthen the powers of local authorities within a logic of decentralization and subsidiarity
Metropolitan areas will have their own well-defined competencies that allow them to contribute effectively to the management and coordination of metropolitan-wide networks, particularly in the areas of transport, water and waste, energy, economic and tourist promotion, as well as management equipment and incentive programs for the regional development of the municipalities that comprise them;
The PS defends the principle of subsidiarity as a guide for deciding on the most appropriate level for exercising responsibilities and powers (national, regional or local).
For this reason, the PS will promote the transfer of skills to the most appropriate levels, providing, in particular:
Intermunicipal communities will be an instrument for strengthening intermunicipal cooperation, in conjunction with the new model of regional governance resulting from the democratization of the CCDR and the creation of metropolitan authorities.
The responsibilities, bodies and models of governance and accountability will be reviewed;
Municipalities are the fundamental structure for the management of public services in a proximity dimension, which is why their participation will be expanded in the areas of education, at the level of basic and secondary education, with respect for the pedagogical autonomy of schools, health, at the level primary and continued health care, social action, in coordination with the social network, transport, culture, housing, civil protection, public security and port and maritime areas;
The parishes will have different powers depending on their nature and will exercise powers in areas that are currently attributed to them by municipal delegation;
The strengthening of the powers of local authorities in the area of ​​transport determines that the processes of privatization or concession to private parties of urban public transport companies are stopped.
Reorganize decentralized services and expand the proximity service network
The PS will provide territorial coherence to the State's deconcentrated administration and promote the integration of the State's deconcentrated services into the CCDR.
For the PS, it is a priority to generalize the network of local public services to be developed in close collaboration with local authorities, specifically providing for:
The opening of new citizen stores;
The opening of multi-service counters;
The creation of mobile proximity units, which aim to ensure a quality public service in territories with low population density;
Promoting the assisted use of electronic support services.
Putting local financing at the service of territorial cohesion
The participation of municipalities in State taxes (IRS, IRC and VAT), to be distributed according to criteria for promoting social and territorial cohesion;
Direct participation in the revenue generated in the municipality, through the contribution of IRC and territorial-based participation in IRS and VAT;
The PS will promote the change of local financing rules, so that the financing of local authorities not only follows the strengthening of their powers,
but allows it to converge to the European average of participation in public revenue, by implementing the following measures:
The collection of local taxes and fees in areas of municipal jurisdiction.
Correct the errors in the extinction of parishes by rule and square
Evaluate the territorial reorganization of parishes, establishing objective criteria that allow local authorities themselves to assess the results of the merger/aggregation and correct unresolved cases.
V 21 CAUSES TO MOBILIZE PORTUGAL
Turning the page on austerity requires a short-term response, embodied in a program for economic recovery,
for investment and employment that allows us to react quickly and begin to reverse the negative effects of the austerity policies of the right-wing coalition government and the consequences of the troika's intervention.
Furthermore, this change in policies implies a very profound change in the way Portugal asserts its position in Europe, which has suffered an unprecedented decline under the right-wing coalition government.
That is why the PS's proposals were presented in parts II and III of this Electoral Program to, on the one hand, turn the page on austerity
and adopt measures that allow, in the short term, to recover the economy, investment and employment
and, on the other hand, to have a different attitude and position in the European Union.
Furthermore, the PS understands that the Country will only develop adequately, equitably and with equal opportunities with a Strong, Intelligent and Modern State.
Therefore, in part IV of this Program, this challenge was presented, with concrete proposals to have a better State, with modern public services, close and useful for citizens and companies.
An economic recovery, investment and employment program is absolutely fundamental for the economy to regain dynamism and begin an effective path to reducing unemployment.
And a Strong, Intelligent and Modern State is a fundamental condition for everyone to enjoy the same opportunities in a socially fair country.
However, the PS is aware that the causes of our delays are deep and cannot be resolved just with a short-term program and a better State.
In effect, to resolve the structural issues that block our development and for the country to be competitive in a global world, it is necessary to focus on valuing our resources and our added value instead of following the path of reducing wages, income and pensions, which has proven not to achieve results and which does not follow the development model of the European countries of which we want to continue to be part.
Resolving our problems and delays implies that in the next four years of the legislature we focus on the essentials and the problems that need to be faced and resolved, instead of dispersing means and resources.
Therefore, the PS Electoral Program precisely identifies the 21 causes on which the change we need to face to make Portugal a more competitive country depends, identifying measures for this purpose, as well as impacts and timetables for implementation.
The 21 causes that are proposed to the Portuguese below correspond to an alternative path, very different from the policies of the right-wing coalition government, organized around five pillars: putting people back at the center of public policies,
value our territory,
give priority to innovation,
pursue greater cohesion and lower inequalities and affirm Portugal on a global scale.
Therefore, to give priority to people, it is necessary to take on the following causes:
Combat school failure, guarantee 12 years of schooling;
Invest in adult education and lifelong training;
Modernize. Qualify and diversify higher education;
React to the demographic challenge;
Promote quality of life;
A new generation of housing policies.
To value our territory, the PS understands that we have to defend the following causes: Sea: a bet on the future;
Affirm the “interior” as central to the Iberian market;
Promote territorial cohesion
and environmental sustainability;
Value agricultural and forestry activities and rural areas.
In turn, to prioritize innovation, our causes are:
Lead the energy transition;
Invest in culture, democratize access;
Invest in science and technology, democratize innovation;
Priority to innovation and internationalization of companies.
For the PS, we strive for more cohesion and less inequalities for the following reasons:
Ensure the sustainability of Social Security;
Better tax justice;
Fight poverty;
Build a more equal society.
Finally, for Portugal to assert itself on a global scale, it is necessary:
Promote the Portuguese language and Portuguese-speaking citizenship;
Continue Portugal in Portuguese communities.
A. PRIORITY TO PEOPLE
The dignity of people must be the central value of a decent society.
People are the country's first and most important asset.
Investing in the valorization of human capital is a first condition for a more prosperous country.
Therefore, the main investment in the future is investing in people of different generations, origins and abilities.
Giving priority to people means providing everyone with qualification opportunities, through education and professional training:
for young people, the opportunity to have access to education under conditions of equal access and opportunities for academic success;
and for older people, particularly those who did not have the opportunity to qualify, ensure that they now have a new opportunity to do so.
Giving priority to people means investing in higher education, improving its quality and diversifying it.
Giving priority to people means valuing the Portuguese who live in their country, but also the Portuguese who are displaced around the world,
as well as those who, not being national citizens, chose Portugal to live.
Giving priority to people means facing the demographic challenge in its complexity,
promoting birth and parenthood,
promoting the return of emigrants who want to return
and better welcoming immigrants.
Valuing people means promoting quality of life, taking into account the need to prepare our society for the inevitable aging of the population, encouraging sports practice
and people's rights in the market are defended.
Giving priority to people also means realizing their fundamental right to housing, ensuring that everyone has access to housing in decent conditions.
To this end, a major boost will be given to the rehabilitation of urban centers,
a new concept of affordable rental will be created,
Households at risk of losing their housing will be protected
and the social housing policy will be relaunched.
1. DEFEND THE SNS, PROMOTE HEALTH
The National Health Service is the great achievement of the Social State in our country.
It generated gains in health that put us on par with the rest of Europe, prolonged life and its quality for millions of Portuguese people and reduced many of the inequalities that marked us for centuries.
The PSD/CDS government led the SNS to spend scarce resources worse and created serious problems and inequalities in access, lacking strategic vision and the capacity to carry out essential organizational reforms.
The reinvigoration and recovery of the SNS and its performance therefore constitute one of the most arduous challenges for the next decade, being a decisive test of political determination in defending the Social State.
The most vulnerable Portuguese today feel the lack of accessibility, dehumanization and loss of quality in the SNS.
This situation must be reversed by regaining the Portuguese’s trust in the SNS.
The PS naturally cannot escape this challenge and this responsibility.
It is, therefore, urgent to provide the SNS with the capacity to respond better and faster to the needs of SNS citizens,
simplifying access,
taking advantage of the means of proximity,
expanding the ability, in one place, for citizens to obtain consultation, diagnostic and therapeutic means that can be concentrated there,
avoiding constant redirection to dispersed and distant units.
The SNS can only be user-friendly if its administration is simplified and modernized through the creation of a Health SIMPLEX that makes user movement at the different levels of the system transparent, informed and welcoming.
We have to restore the family-State balance in health financing.
The current 32% paid by families must be progressively reverted to values ​​that do not discriminate against access or make families insolvent.
The collapse felt in access to emergencies is the most dramatic mark of the current government.
It is urgent to restore the functioning of hospitals by intervening upstream, through the creation of more family health units
and downstream, in the execution of the development plan for continued care for the elderly and citizens in situations of dependence.
It is essential to relaunch the reform of primary health care and integrated continuous care at the same time that a hospital reform must be implemented that focuses on relaunching the SNS.
We have to integrate health benefits with Social Security benefits, both at local and regional and central levels.
As the determinants of poor health are horizontal and the needs for coordinated support for elderly and dependent citizens are increasingly acute, the current verticalization of the two main instruments of the Social State should not be perpetuated.
Promote health through a new ambition for Public Health
To obtain gains in health, it is necessary to intervene in the various determinants in a systemic, systematic and integrated way.
Policies to combat poverty, housing conditions, employment and work, food, transport, urban planning and leisure spaces must be highlighted as fundamental.
The articulation of health with social action and education, in which “health in all policies” should be a reference strategy, will allow leveraging and creating the support structure for the sustainability of political action.
The PS will value Public Health as an area of ​​intervention, for the good management of alert systems and timely response of services,
the diagnosis of problematic situations and the elaboration, with the community, of strategic action plans,
ensuring that local health profiles and plans are constructed in a way that maximizes resources, valuing people.
The following measures stand out: Creation of a National Education Program for Health, Literacy and Self-Care,
preparing and supporting informal providers in home care,
preventing diabetes, obesity,
promoting mental health and healthy aging
as well as the rational and safe use of the medicine;
Implement Local Health Plans in compliance with the National Health Plan (PNS);
Strengthen epidemiological surveillance, health promotion, primary prevention and secondary prevention;
Revitalize the Communicable Disease Control Program to face new epidemics, the resurgence of known infections and multiple resistance to antibiotics;
Promote smoking prevention measures (expanding access to smoking cessation consultations),
healthy eating (collective eating in schools and work environments)
and preventing the consumption of alcohol and other addictive products;
Recover the importance, in the context of the SNS, of the National Mental Health Network;
Evaluate and update the National Vaccination Program.
Reduce inequalities between citizens in access to healthcare
The policy of the last four years has created new forms of inequality between citizens in access to health that must be overcome.
The fundamental right to health involves designing specific measures to combat inequalities in access and positive differentiation, including:
Practice positive differentiation policies aimed at the most vulnerable citizens,
for women of childbearing age and children,
elderly and dependent people;
Pay special attention to children at risk and in danger, developing the support capacity of health services, in coordination with other competent entities in this matter;
Strengthen the participation of regional coordination bodies and local administration at their respective levels, developing the corresponding participatory mechanisms in the management of the SNS.
Strengthen citizen power in the SNS, promoting availability, accessibility, convenience, speed and humanization of services
The SNS must listen more to its users and organize itself according to their preferences, focusing on the quality of the service, promoting availability, accessibility, convenience, speed and humanization.
It must do so by reaching out to them in the family, at school, at work, in the community, in culture and in leisure, creating an environment favorable to the promotion and defense of health.
To strengthen citizen power in the SNS, the following measures are essential:
Provide citizens, progressively, the freedom to choose which units they wish to receive assistance in, with respect for the technical hierarchy and SNS referral rules;
Creation of a Health SIMPLEX that simplifies procedures relating to access and use of the SNS, which must be given priority;
Modernize and integrate information technologies and existing networks in order to keep older people and patients in their family environment for longer, developing telemonitoring and telemedicine;
Encourage the participation of older people in professional and social life, supporting policies that favor gradual progression between active life and retirement;
Create the National Health Council in order to guarantee the participation of citizens who use the NHS in defining policies, with the participation of local authorities and professionals, as well as regional and institutional councils, as a way of promoting a culture of transparency and provision of accounts before the company;
Intervene in the creation of legal and tax incentives that directly or indirectly influence the environment and behaviors that determine health and illness.
Expanding and improving the capacity of the primary healthcare network
One of the main mistakes of the right-wing coalition government was the disinvestment in the primary health care network, having interrupted a reform process initiated by the PS and which proved to be an important improvement in the quality and effectiveness of the system's first line of response, a more citizen-centered response that proved to be more efficient.
It is essential to recover the centrality of the primary health care network in health policy, expanding and improving its capacity.
Key elements of this response are; Providing this level of care with a new type of responses, namely, auxiliary diagnostic and therapeutic means;
Strengthening primary health care capabilities, through complementary support in areas such as psychology, ophthalmology, obstetrics, pediatrics and physical and rehabilitation medicine;
Integrated and proximity approach to chronic disease through the creation of a prevention program for the Integrated Management of Chronic Disease, covering hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease and oncological disease;
Expanding and improving SNS coverage in the areas of Oral Health and Visual Health.
Pursue the objective of ensuring that all Portuguese people have an assigned family doctor.
The PS undertakes, by the end of the legislature, to create 100 new Family Health Units, thereby ensuring the allocation of family doctors to over 500 thousand inhabitants.
Improve hospital management, circulation of clinical information and coordination with other levels of care and other agents in the sector
The existence of non-specialized consultations, non-urgent emergencies, patients retained beyond the acute phase of the disease are problems that must be resolved through a better referral system and the use of information and communication technologies, improving hospital management and articulation with other levels of care.
This change implies better planning and incentives for professional mobility.
To improve hospital management, the circulation of clinical information and coordination with other levels of care and other agents in the sector, the PS undertakes to carry out the following measures:
Reform Hospitals in their internal organization and management model, taking the Autonomous Management Units (UAG) as an inspiring example,
investing in management autonomy and accountability and the application of incentives linked to performance;
Evaluate existing hospital experiences under a public-private partnership (PPP) regime, explaining their advantages and disadvantages in order to introduce corrective or revising improvements;
Create an Integrated Access Management System -SIGA, which facilitates access and freedom of choice for users in the NHS, particularly with regard to areas where waiting is still significant: specialist consultations, hospitalizations, diagnostic aids and therapy;
Invest in the Electronic Health Record, as an essential instrument for managing access with efficiency, equity and quality;
Value the role of community pharmacies as agents of care provision, investing in the development of measures to support the rational use of medicine and taking advantage of their services, in conjunction with SNS units, to test the partial delegation of the administration of oral therapy to them in oncology and communicable diseases.
Expansion and improvement of the integration of the Continuing Care Network and other support services for people in situations of dependence
The long-term care network, another major reform in recent years, suffered a sudden stop in investment.
It must be encouraged in the community and on the outskirts of large cities to reach the homes of the elderly and dependents, integrated with the social action network.
It is necessary to create an environment favorable to active and healthy aging, which must include the active participation of local authorities.
To do this, it is essential:
Strengthening continued care provided at home and in outpatient clinics;
Strengthening the national network by increasing the number of vacancies in integrated continued care in all its types,
in a joint effort with third sector organizations and the private sector, with a special focus on large urban centers;
Recognition and support for informal caregivers who support dependent people in their homes;
Strengthening the mental health component in the Integrated Continuing Care Network.
Improve human resources management and motivation of healthcare professionals
To defend the NHS, it is essential to improve the management of its human resources and promote the appreciation of health professionals,
promoting new models of cooperation and division of responsibilities between different health professions through the following strategies:
Improved coordination between care, teaching, pre- and post-graduate training and research functions in universities, polytechnics and State laboratories;
Encouraging the mobility of professionals to less favored specialties and regions through policies aimed at professional development;
Invests in new models of cooperation between health professions, with regard to the distribution of competences and responsibilities.
Improve SNS governance
Obtain more and better results from available resources, that is, increase the efficiency of the SNS, by improving the SNS governance instruments, through measures such as:
Improvement of the current service contracting model, introducing incentives associated with improving the quality, efficiency and equity of services, included in management contracts;
Strengthening the autonomy and responsibility of SNS managers and service providing units;
Clarification of the roles of shareholder, financier, regulator and provider within the SNS, putting an end to the ambiguities arising from the overlapping of various roles;
Progressive evolution towards the separation of sectors through the creation of mechanisms for full dedication to the exercise of public functions in the SNS;
Reduction of inefficiencies and redundancies in the system, preventing demand skimming and the deterioration of productivity and quality in the sector;
Introduction of transparency measures at all levels, with timely disclosure of information regarding the performance of the SNS;
Progressive reduction of situations that generate conflicts of interest between the public and private sectors, including relations with the pharmaceutical industry;
Strengthening regulatory mechanisms by clarifying the competencies and roles of different actors in each sector of activity;
Progressive mutualization of ADSE, opening its management to representatives legitimately appointed by its beneficiaries, pensioners and family members;
Promotion of a sustainable policy in the area of ​​medicine in order to reconcile budgetary rigor with access to therapeutic innovation,
strengthening the use of generic medicines and defining a clear strategy regarding biosimilar medicines.
Improve the quality of healthcare
Strengthen policies and programs to improve the quality of healthcare, particularly through the following measures:
Invest in measures to promote health and combat disease;
Invest in health governance models based on continuous quality improvement and valuing user experience and participation
as well as implementing measures to reduce waste, value and disseminate good practices and ensure patient safety.
Deepen and develop health technology assessment models that adequately evaluate new medicines, medical devices, non-pharmacological interventions and new health programs involving relevant university and research centers;
Support scientific research, in its clinical, public health and, in particular, health services administration aspects, creating specific financing mechanisms.
2. COMBAT SCHOOL FAILURE, GUARANTEE 12 YEARS OF SCHOOLING
Education and training are essential foundations for the future of people and the country.
Investing in the qualification of the Portuguese constitutes an essential means of valuing citizens, democratic citizenship and the sustainable development of the country.
In a society and economy based on learning, knowledge and qualifications, education is simultaneously a condition for employability and competitiveness and a fundamental condition for a cohesive and progressive society.
The PSD/CDS government developed an educational policy that abandoned the most difficult and urgent battles:
devalued the fight against school failure, which, after several years of improvement, rose again in basic education;
devalued the fight against inequalities, weakening the role of public schools for all as an element of social mobility,
weakened the quality of the public education service, reducing the focus on full-time schooling and the conditions for curriculum enrichment activities and impoverishing the curriculum by reducing it to core subjects
and destabilized the functioning of schools, particularly in the placement of teachers.
For the PS, education is a privileged means of promoting social justice and equal opportunities.
Our educational policy will guarantee equal access for all children to public schools
and will promote the educational success of all, particularly throughout the 12 years of compulsory education.
The PS will therefore assume as its main priority in educational policy the mobilization of Portuguese society to relentlessly combat school failure, which constitutes an obstacle to the quality of teaching, equity, learning and the fulfillment of compulsory education by all children and young people.
This fight must involve the whole of society, the different government departments, parents, schools and local authorities, in a continued effort to resolve one of the most serious obstacles to progress in the qualification of Portuguese people and the reduction of inequalities.
The effort to combat academic failure and improve the quality of education must:
Starting from knowledge about the phenomenon, best national and international practices and thus allowing a broad consensus around the strategies to be followed;
Mobilize all educational agents, ensuring greater participation of the various social forces in decisions and implementation of educational policies, never compromising the technical and professional autonomy of educational agents;
Guarantee the stability of work in schools, which presupposes progressive, planned, negotiated and evaluated reforms, and a strong commitment to teacher training;
Focus on the school and its organization, autonomy and initiative, to identify the most effective strategies;
Ensure that all children have the right to a common education that is a path of enriching diversity and with specific support suited to different needs.
Based on strengthening the quality of the public education service, the quality and success of learning;
Be articulated with the program to combat child poverty and other social programs.
To reduce school failure and ensure that all children and young people complete 12 years of compulsory education with success and quality in their learning, the PS government will develop public policies covering all cycles and levels of education, with a special focus on education basic level, with the aim of reducing school failure in this cycle by half.
Investing in pre-school education as a key to combating school failure: Starting well is always worth it
Recognizing the decisive role that the expansion of pre-school education, carried out by a PS government, had in reducing school failure and improving the quality of students' learning, it is important to resume this investment in expanding the network and in the qualification of childhood education. The PS will develop measures to:
Guarantee, by the end of the legislature, the universal provision of pre-school education to all children aged three to five, using the public network,
the private network, in its private and cooperative component, and the solidarity network;
Encourage schools, groups and other institutions to design specific plans that ensure that all children develop the learning provided for in the curricular guidelines;
Ensure pedagogical supervision over establishments that are part of the national pre-school education network, regardless of whether they belong to the public network or the solidarity network;
Develop instruments for early diagnosis of risk situations as a strategy for preventing school failure at a time when action is more effective;
Develop monitoring and training programs for educators, focused on schools and groups, foreseeing articulation with the actions developed for the 1st cycle of basic education.
Combat failure at its roots: develop an integrated, global and common basic education for all children
In the last four years, after years of marked improvement, school failure has increased in basic education.
The PS will implement its program in basic education with the main objective of ensuring that all children and young people complete the first nine years of schooling with a quality education, based on a wide variety of learning in the arts, social sciences, natural sciences, foreign languages, physical education, mathematics, Portuguese language and citizenship and rejecting the reduction of the curriculum that has occurred in recent years.
The PS rejects the early dualization instruments applied by this government.
To achieve this objective, we must: Promote greater coordination between the three cycles of basic education, progressively redefining its structure in order to mitigate the negative effects of transitions between cycles, assuming a more integrated management of the curriculum and reducing excessive disciplinary burden on students;
Encourage curricular flexibility, from the 1st cycle, using different possibilities of pedagogical management, autonomously managing resources, times and school spaces, adapted to the multiple existing contexts, with a view to improving the quality of learning and the educational success of all students;
Ensure that all forms of curricular organization and management aim at the integration of students and their academic progress and not at early discrimination, therefore rejecting the early dualization developed by this government;
Give priority to the 1st cycle of basic education, creating conditions for all students to achieve the learning objectives set out in the national curriculum
and ensuring that, at the end of the legislature, retention is a merely residual phenomenon;
Consolidate curriculum enrichment activities, fully integrating them into the pedagogical life of schools, thus contributing to the deepening of the principle of “Full-Time School”, extending it to all basic education;
Support schools and groups to develop internal evaluation processes, which contribute to the regulation and self-regulation of learning and teaching and educational projects and to the production of credible information about what students know and are capable of doing;
Reevaluate the carrying out of exams in the first years of schooling, a practice systematically criticized by international organizations with relevant work in the area of ​​education, deepening its connection with internal evaluation.
Ensuring compliance with 12 years of compulsory education: valuing secondary education and diversifying the training offer
Completing 12 years of schooling implies the valorization of secondary education, which must involve the affirmation of its identity, consolidating and deepening the diversification, quality and real value of all training offers, as well as its nature as the last cycle of education. compulsory education of 12 years.
Compulsory education must be inclusive and promote success for all.
The school is responsible for promoting the development of the talents of all children and young people, which involves time to evolve and grow, developing self-esteem.
According to international studies, Portuguese children, especially the poorest, are among those most penalized by retention in their school careers.
To achieve this objective, the PS will develop a support program for schools and groups that helps students to outline their school paths and life projects, in order to ensure that everyone completes 12 years of schooling.
and to ensure a progressive rapprochement between the percentages of young people who attend courses of a professional nature and those who attend scientific-humanistic courses.
To achieve this, the PS will develop the following two lines of action:
Value secondary education
Improve the quality of scientific-humanistic courses through a set of measures aimed at enhancing secondary education as an autonomous diploma that corresponds to the definition of compulsory education.
This objective involves: Creating programs for the development of experimental teaching, problem solving and real valorization of all training components, namely those of a technical, technological and artistic nature, as well as physical education;
Support schools and groups to develop more credible internal assessment systems, which contribute to improving learning and teaching and which constitute fundamental elements of regulation and self-regulation of curricular practices;
Diversify the training offer and value professional and artistic education
Implement an agenda for the valorization of professional education that focuses on the expansion and centrality of professional education, its social valorization and the recognition of this path.
The set of measures to be pursued must simultaneously contribute to promoting the quality of the professional education response,
its relationship with the job market
and value their contribution to promoting equity and educational success:
Expand the range of courses and qualifications covered, particularly at secondary and post-secondary levels, in order to meet the commitments and goals assumed with the EU;
Strengthen pedagogical diversification strategies in the context of professional education
and promote a greater connection between school and community and family, taking into account young people who left school without completing secondary education and who are not yet working;
Enhance the status of professional education trainers, through the development of continuous training programs in the fields of pedagogy, didactics and technical skills
– and review the organization of initial training aimed at them;
Create conditions of greater stability for the financing of the network of professional schools, through the use of multi-annual financing programs conditioned on the merit of their educational projects;
Promote greater recognition of professional education and professional qualifications within the labor market, establishing cooperation dynamics with social partners and regional business councils
and enhancing social consultation and collective negotiation to obtain greater recognition of professional certifications;
Create a program that consolidates, develops and improves specialized artistic education, from basic to secondary level, supporting the celebration of partnerships that allow for a progressive increase in the number of regular education students who attend this type of education.
Mobilize School Social Action to combat inequalities and school failure
In a period of worsening economic and social well-being of families and the population in general, with highly detrimental effects on the development and social insertion of children and young people and their integration and educational and professional progress, a decisive role must be given to all public, charitable and private entities.
It is necessary to mobilize School Social Action to improve and deepen support for children and young people in situations of greater social and economic fragility,
actively contributing to combat poverty, inequalities and school dropout within each school and each group.
The reinforcement of school social action must necessarily involve the articulation of the activity of the schools' educational teams, not only in their academic aspects, but also in those of support, guidance and educational and social mediation, with all the training and provision available to the local and national level;
This objective also involves developing a system for the acquisition and return of school manuals that ensures the progressive free use of school manuals and other teaching resources formally adopted for primary and secondary education.
Focus schools on teaching and student learning, valuing their professionals
The PS will significantly consolidate and expand the regime of autonomy, administration and management of schools and groups, as a central element of the effort to decentralize the competences hitherto concentrated in the Ministry of Education, reinforcing the legitimacy and responsibility of its administrative bodies and management.
This effort has as a fundamental element the consolidation of the pedagogical autonomy of schools and teachers.
The PS policy values ​​the teaching role, and assumes the irreplaceable role that educators and teachers play in building a more democratic and inclusive school, establishing a regular dialogue with their representative organizations for this purpose.
This valorization implies the recognition of the stability of the teaching staff for schools and students, the importance of initial and continuing training and their interrelationship with the schools' educational projects.
Create conditions so that schools and groups can manage the national curriculum in a flexible and contextualized way, using the methods, approaches and procedures that are most appropriate for all students to learn;
Promote decentralization and de-bureaucratization of the educational system, as essential elements so that schools and groups can work in a climate that allows them to be more focused on what students have to learn;
Develop actions to ensure that student learning forms the core of educational projects in schools and groups, considering classrooms as privileged spaces for learning to discover, analyze and interpret scientific, social, artistic, environmental and technological phenomena;
Create conditions for schools and groups, in conjunction with training centers, higher education institutions and other stakeholders, to become privileged spaces for the contextualized training of their teachers;
Support schools and groups in the development of projects that promote responsible citizenship, encouraging the establishment of educational partnerships with guardians and educational communities, in order to prevent situations of indiscipline and violence;
Ensure greater stability of the teaching staff, using mechanisms to encourage the location of teachers in less attractive areas,
promoting the reduction of teacher rotation between different schools, ensuring that the placement of teachers allows students to be monitored throughout a teaching cycle;
Relaunch continuous training programs, in conjunction with higher education institutions, integrated into an active policy of valuing teachers and educators, combating inequalities, abandonment and retention and truly improving the performance of schools and groups.
Continuous training will be adopted as a professional development strategy for teachers and educators, contextualizing it and adapting it to their needs, the design and development of educational projects, always with a view to improving the quality of student learning;
Review the recruitment process for educators and teachers, suspending the carrying out of the Skills and Knowledge Assessment Test and re-considering its foundations, objectives and terms of reference;
Consolidate the optimization and qualification processes of human resources, giving emphasis to teaching functions and teaching practice and promoting qualification for specialized functions, namely leadership and pedagogical supervision, educational management and administration and special education.
Modernize learning models and tools
The complexity and speed of the contemporary world require the permanent improvement of pedagogical methods.
Interdisciplinarity, the contextualization of knowledge and the development of skills are now critical dimensions of the learning process.
In this sense, it is necessary to promote a substantive adaptation in the principles and organization of the educational system, in accordance with a holistic vision, which expands the pedagogical and management autonomy of schools, which respects the differences, abilities and learning rhythms of students and that promotes greater alignment of educational policies with the social and economic dynamics of our time.
To facilitate the modernization of learning models and their instruments, the autonomy of schools in the design and adoption of their own educational projects must be reinforced, in a participatory process, which involves local actors who are part of the educational community, namely teachers, students, parents and local authorities.
To this end, we propose: Implement a national program for innovation in learning, adapting educational systems to standards that better respond to the challenges of learning in the 21st century, enabling initiatives to mobilize schools and school groups;
Design and implement a strategy for educational digital resources, which promote the creation, dissemination and use of digital content in the learning process, based on communities of practice with authors, producers, teachers, students and parents;
Promote the use of ICT within the curriculum, aiming to grasp, from an early age, learning practices based on new technologies, capitalizing on motivations, fostering a taste for learning and
review the ICT discipline, introducing new skills, such as programming and thus bringing the educational process closer to the social and professional dynamics of our time;
Promote the launch of a Competitiveness and Technological Hub for educational innovation, through a collaboration platform between schools, companies, laboratories and civil society, for educational innovation;
Launch a simplification process in the central administration of education for greater autonomy and concentration of schools in their fundamental activity,
including the restructuring of the central administration and its missions,
reducing its weight in the system, focusing its activities on planning, evaluating and regulating the system, intervening, less and less, in the day-to-day activities of schools and groups.
3. INVEST IN ADULT EDUCATION AND LIFE-LONG TRAINING
The action determined by the qualification of the Portuguese should not only focus on reducing school failure and abandonment and creating longer and higher quality educational paths for young people.
Portugal continues to have a problem with the qualifications of our adults of working age, which currently has a triple dimension:
The structural deficit in educational qualifications remains (62% of adults aged 25-64 did not complete secondary education);
The increased and very serious problem of high unemployment rates, with relevance to the proportion of structural unemployment among the active population and the inadequacy of their professional skills in light of the changes occurring on a global scale in the productive fabric; It is
The lack of intervention, on a scale and in depth, like that needed in the country to face the real situation.
Despite this diagnosis being consensual, the PSD/CDS government canceled the New Opportunities initiative and did not replace it with any program to focus on adult qualifications, with all efforts to overcome one of the most serious deficits that harm the country currently being suspended. and the Portuguese.
The continuity of public interventions in this area is a crucial element for reducing the qualifications deficit, as well as continuously improving the quality of adult education and training processes.
It is, therefore, with this purpose that the PS will assume a fundamental objective to reestablish adult education and overcome one of the most serious national deficits.
Create an Adult Education and Training Program that consolidates a lifelong learning system and its strategic action for the next decade
Revitalize adult education and training as a central pillar of the qualifications system
, ensuring the continuity of lifelong learning policies
and the permanent improvement of the quality of learning processes and results, which seeks to:
Based on complementarity between recognition and certification of skills and
mandatory certified training based on the individual needs of trainees;
Create adult counseling and guidance mechanisms that allow the referral of trainees based on their profile, training needs and opportunities for professional insertion and personal fulfillment, ensuring consistency with individuals' expectations;
Create differentiated education-training paths based on the needs of specific groups, such as: Qualification-Employment Program for long-term unemployed people, workers in precarious employment situations and other vulnerable groups;
Basic Skills Program for literacy, English language, ICT;
post-secondary vocational programs for young adults with incomplete or completed secondary education;
programs for scientific, cultural and civic promotion (participatory citizenship);
training program for low-skilled entrepreneurs, among others;
Revitalize adult education and training as a central pillar of the qualifications system, through the activation of a national network of centers specializing in adult education and training in service, advice, guidance and learning pathways, based on the real qualification needs of different territories/economic sectors;
Stimulate local networks for qualification that allow the coordination and concertation at a regional and local level of the needs for educational and training provision and its adjustment to demand, with the necessary coordination with the central bodies responsible for policies and financing of the different qualification modalities;
Progressively replace recurrent education with adult education and training courses corresponding to the same levels of education now available in the educational system, with the introduction of distance learning possibilities on an experimental basis;
Include the promotion of Portuguese people's qualification levels, lifelong learning dynamics, the creation of conditions for employability and decent work as strategic aspects of an agreement based on social consultation.
4. MODERNIZE, QUALIFY AND DIVERSIFY HIGHER EDUCATION
One of Portugal's main objectives for 2020 should be to reach 40% of higher education graduates in the 30-34 age group.
In 2013, it was still 29%, while the European average reached 37%.
This great national goal must be accompanied by policies to encourage youth employment, attract qualified human resources and boost innovation communities, with the active involvement of higher education institutions, employers and social and economic actors.
The progressive democratization of Higher Education built in recent decades was achieved, despite the scarcity of resources in many periods, with the persistent, serious and demanding work of many.
This type of work culture is the basis for the development of a knowledge society and must be valued and encouraged.
The systematic modernization of Portuguese Higher Education necessarily involves:
Due to the persistence of public policies focused on the higher qualification of assets, including resources for the development of Higher Education in a context of demanding budgetary consolidation,
as well as the reinforcement of structural funds to support school Social Action instruments in higher education;
Through the methodical action of independent evaluation and accreditation of institutions and study cycles, based on international reference criteria whose adoption allows the reduction of bureaucracy in procedures;
By focusing on internationalization, both in terms of establishing strategic collaboration partnerships with foreign institutions and in terms of attracting foreign students and researchers;
By continually reinforcing openness to civil society and labor markets, enshrining systematic practices of interinstitutional relationships, including work internships, flexible working hours and curricula, pedagogical modernization, as well as the establishment of consortia and the continuous optimization of government processes in public institutions.
In this sense, increased participation and responsibility of members external to the institutions in their governing bodies must be promoted;
By encouraging the adoption of flexible management systems by institutions, promoting the appreciation of good practices.
The consolidation of higher education as a driver of future progress also depends on stable, consensual public policies focused on the country's scientific development and its growing openness and international relevance,
as well as guaranteeing the autonomy of scientific and higher education institutions.
It requires the continuous and systematic modernization of student learning, the availability of universities and polytechnics to restructure their respective networks and training offerings on a national and regional scale, promoting quality and making the use of public resources even more efficient.
The consolidation of higher education also requires full articulation between the development policies of the scientific and higher education systems, and institutions must be provided with material and governance conditions for this purpose, with a consequent increase in the level of accountability and demands.
To achieve these objectives, a PS government will develop the following fundamental measures.
Expand and democratize access to higher education
The PS will evaluate the access regime to higher education and promote a public debate, aiming at its modernization and adaptation to new contexts, namely with the objective of:
Expand the recruitment base for candidates for higher education and the qualifications of Portuguese people,
stimulating lifelong learning
and valuing a diverse range of university and polytechnic institutions, taking into account the major changes in the training offer that are taking place on a global scale;
Review the scholarship award system, with a view to meeting the European objective of increasing the number of higher education students and democratizing access and guaranteeing the possibility of phased payment of tuition fees;
Create a program to support mobility in higher education and displaced students that involves the State, universities and municipalities;
Restructure and reduce bureaucracy in the school social action system, in order to achieve efficiency gains and better respond to the needs of students in need in the different education cycles;
Stimulate distance learning in higher education institutions, so that it can represent an alternative and effective model, particularly in view of the objectives of higher qualification of assets.
Reactivate a pact of confidence in higher education
Reactivate a pact of trust in higher education, including a financing practice combined with contracts to be established based on institutional projects and encouraging interinstitutional cooperation. This pact has the following objectives:
Stimulate a stable long-term financing framework, based on objectives and with a multi-year definition, involving base financing, pedagogical modernization projects, equipment and infrastructure reinforcement projects.
Ensure an adequate assessment of the legal regime of higher education institutions,
reinforcing the autonomy of institutions and the foundational regime
and ensuring its institutional diversification;
Stimulate better integration between teaching and research;
Encourage the process of continuous improvement of the public network of establishments and programs, through processes of reinforcement, cooperation or association between institutions, and taking into account criteria of territorial coverage, social demand, specialization and internationalization.
Take advantage of and develop the diversity of higher, university and polytechnic education, promoting a differentiated framework of institutions that encourages the qualifications of all Portuguese and encourages forms of collaboration and sharing of resources between institutions whenever appropriate;
Ensure a long-term framework to reinforce the autonomy of institutions, particularly administrative and financial,
strengthening and encouraging the adoption of the foundational regime by public higher education institutions,
the establishment of consortia
and the continuous optimization of the government system of public institutions,
enshrining the responsibility of members external to the institutions in their governing bodies;
Promote better integration between higher education institutions and regional development policies.
Create conditions for the renewal of teachers and specialists in Higher Education institutions
The PS defends the launch of a new program to support the attraction and continuous renewal of teachers and specialists for higher education institutions, which encourages more competitive recruitment mechanisms, internal promotion and qualification and joint appointments with shared costs.
This program must be linked to measures to promote non-precarious scientific employment
and benefit from the introduction of hiring mechanisms compensated by the partial retirement of teaching staff.
This program's main objectives will be: More qualified employment with a clear incentive for the rejuvenation and renewal of higher education institutions;
Greater capacity for knowledge transfer, with social and economic impact;
Increase the mobility of higher education teachers;
Evaluate the development of careers in higher education institutions with the objectives of strengthening the interaction between teaching and research and the connection to the economic and social fabric.
Improving levels of educational success in higher education
Create a program to support pedagogical modernization, through a competition for competitively based projects, ensuring the systematic implementation of pedagogical practices that are truly student-centered and encouraging their autonomy;
Deepen and specialize the pedagogical training of higher education teachers, ensuring the formalization of systematic work to stimulate pedagogical modernization projects in all areas of knowledge and cooperation between institutions;
Encourage programs with high curricular flexibility and according to best international practices (namely with the adoption of major/minor) with the aim of encouraging the adaptation of training to emerging challenges.
Strengthen the internationalization instruments of higher education institutions
The PS defends the reinforcement of knowledge internationalization instruments, in particular international partnerships, accompanied by transparent mechanisms for evaluating results and their impacts.
This measure must: Include instruments to support the promotion of partnerships for access to mobility financing programs (Erasmus+ and others), as well as initiatives to create circulation among Portuguese-speaking higher education students;
Encourage the strengthening of international partnerships, but also the creation of instruments for access to mobility financing platforms;
Develop a specific program to support the creation and development of thematic networks between university institutions with international partners;
Strengthen support for the international dissemination of higher education institutions, promoting Portugal as a destination for undergraduate and postgraduate higher education, in the Portuguese language space and in other languages.
Create programs to support curricular internships for higher education students, with institutional co-responsibility for the sustainable and lasting employability of young people
Support the institutionalization and systematization of curricular and extracurricular internships
and the flexibility of timetables and curricula in all years of all higher education programs, bachelor's and master's degrees, with the aim of guaranteeing a greater expectation of employment for young people;
Associate curricular internships with mechanisms to support the employability of graduates and graduates;
Encourage collaboration between universities, polytechnic institutes and companies and other employers, in order to deepen the territorial connection of higher education institutions
and to facilitate the transition between academia and professional insertion.
5. REACT TO THE DEMOGRAPHIC CHALLENGE
As in other European countries, Portugal faces a serious demographic challenge.
According to the projections contained in the 2015 Aging Report, the data on demographic evolution are extremely serious.
In relative terms, within the EU, Portugal stands out for the worst reasons:
We will, within a few years, be the European country with the lowest proportion of children in the resident population (11.5% of children up to 14 years of age in 15 years);
We will be the second country in the Union with the highest relative weight of people over 65 years of age (34.6%);
We will be the country with the greatest proportion of elderly people, over 80 years old (16.1% of the population).
Without changing policies, Portugal will experience a heavy decline in its global population and its working-age population: in 20 years it will lose 700 thousand inhabitants and, at the end of the projection, 8.2 million people will live in Portugal.
In 2060, Portugal will have one of the lowest working-age population rates and it will fall by more than 10 points in future decades.
The demographic challenge we are facing has economic, social and cultural causes, but has been severely aggravated by the crisis the country has been going through in recent years and the massive emigration of young people who, driven out of the country by the absence of life opportunities, further weaken the active population and birth rate.
It is important to promote birth rates,
as well as adequate management of immigration policy
and the return of emigrants who were, in recent years, forced to leave the country.
The appreciation of people must include all Portuguese people who work and live outside the country, taking advantage of their qualifications, their paths and the connection that Portuguese people and descendants of emigrants of various generations maintain with Portugal.
It must also count on immigrants, increasing the capacity to attract people to our country
and promoting ever greater inclusion.
Public policies in the areas of birth rates and migration must have the central objective of contributing to the demographic sustainability of the country and its growth,
guaranteeing conditions so that national citizens can make truly free individual choices in these plans.
In this sense, the PS argues that in order to face demographic challenges, public policies must act in the various areas that can contribute to strengthening the population living in Portugal.
This action must cover: The area of ​​birth rates, in which policies must create public conditions for the exercise of responsible parenthood,
promote reconciliation between work and family,
promote equality in family responsibilities
and remove legal obstacles to birth and parenthood;
In order to control the return of emigrants, the main objectives of the policies will be the elimination of obstacles to the return and circulation of Portuguese emigrants,
the stimulation of relations between emigrants and national society and the movement of emigrants to Portugal;
The domain of immigration, whose policies will have as fundamental objectives the attraction of immigrants, the legality of immigration, the development of an intercultural society and the deepening of the integration of immigrants.
Create public conditions for the exercise of responsible parenting, promoting reconciliation between work and personal life
The PS considers that to promote birth rates it is essential to create public conditions for the exercise of responsible parenting
and, at the same time, promote reconciliation between work and personal life in order to:
Ensure that public schools operate full-time until the age of 14, so that the public system can provide a response for parents whose work schedules are not compatible with staying at school for only part of the day;
Expand the network of daycare centers in large urban centers, increasing the number of places in daycare centers and bringing the level of coverage closer to European average values, investing in particular on the network of daycare centers in conjunction with municipalities;
Encourage the provision of services to promote reconciliation between work and family, at local level and support companies so that they can provide more conciliation mechanisms;
Promote the creation of local daycare centers shared by groups of companies, with the signing of collective bargaining agreements being desirable.
Covered workers will contribute a monthly payment proportional to their income;
Propose in the Social Concertation that, for workers with children under 12 years of age, the application of adaptability schemes for working hours and time banks, whether individual or collective, require their express authorization;
Create a seal of good practices to be awarded to companies that demonstrate that they practice policies that promote conciliation, in which men and women use shared parental leave, flexible working hours and teleworking in a balanced way.
Remove legal obstacles to birth and parenthood
The PS considers that, in order to promote birth rates, it is essential to remove legal obstacles in the area of ​​parenthood, namely:
Clarify that absences caused by treatments within the scope of medically assisted reproduction are justified and do not imply loss of remuneration;
Clarify that all parenting support measures are aimed at fathers and mothers with children, regardless of the parents' marital status;
Clarify that all parenting support measures are aimed at fathers and mothers with children residing in Portugal, regardless of their nationality;
Extend new legal mechanisms for reducing, adapting schedules or justifying absences to care for grandchildren to grandfathers and grandmothers.
Eliminate obstacles to the return of emigrants and their movement
In order to guarantee the movement and return of emigrants, practical conditions must be created to facilitate the return and movement of emigrants who left the country following the crisis, including:
Promote the recognition of academic and professional qualifications, both in destination countries and in Portugal;
Develop an incentive plan for emigrants who wish to return to Portugal;
Facilitate the recognition of documents, such as driving licenses, both in destination countries and in Portugal;
Guarantee the portability of social rights, in particular pensions, through agreements with host states;
Enable, through agreements with host states, especially when it comes to non-EU countries, circular migration routes without loss of residence rights in the host country;
Create, in consulates and embassies, return support offices that publicize work and entrepreneurship opportunities with emigrants and provide assistance on their return.
Boost relations between emigrants and national society
With the aim of creating an effective relationship with emigrant communities, which will allow all Portuguese people to be included in the country's economic and social development strategy, in addition to promoting the Portuguese language and culture among our emigrant communities, several measures may be important:
Support the creation of emigrant networks, in particular among qualified emigrants and entrepreneurs;
Support the connection between these emigrant networks and universities, R&D centers, companies and central and local public bodies;
Stimulate the institutional appreciation of emigrants and their sense of belonging to the national community
and foster relations with the Portuguese diaspora as a mechanism for facilitating the internationalization of the national economy and promoting Portugal's image in the world;
Create an annual award for emigrants who stood out for their contribution to their community and the country;
Support the participation of Portuguese emigrants in activities carried out in Portugal (conferences, projects, consultancies and other public and private initiatives);
Encourage, with universities, the promotion of Portugal as a destination for Portuguese students emigrating on Erasmus and Study Abroad programs.
Promote legal immigration channels, the development of an intercultural society and deepen the integration of immigrants
In order to promote the attraction of immigrants, legal immigration channels and the integration of immigrant communities, the PS goes, beyond the status of Portuguese-speaking citizenship:
Create a visa to look for a job in Portugal, valid for six months;
Promote national universities internationally to carry out the Erasmus and Portugal program to set up new global companies;
Create faster and more transparent mechanisms and procedures for granting visas in Portuguese consulates around the world;
Promote intercultural education from the age of three, include the theme of interculturality in teacher training and value schools with good practices (continuation of the attribution of the intercultural seal);
Reactivate the High Commission for Migration’s training pool;
Streamline procedures regarding nationality, so that interested parties can, as quickly as possible, obtain a response to their request;
Resume seminars on interculturality for the media and the awarding of the journalism prize for cultural diversity;
Promote, through local authorities, initiatives that value diversity and promote interculturality, similar to what has been done with the Integration Fund for Third Country Nationals;
Develop Portuguese language courses with higher language proficiency levels (B1 and B2), allowing the creation of classes of 10 people, designed to prepare immigrants for the official exam;
Develop welcome kits that allow any immigrant to know what to do to integrate regardless of the part of the country where they choose to live;
Adopt an active policy of solidarity when settling refugees recognized by the EU in Portugal.
6. PROMOTE QUALITY OF LIFE
Increasingly, citizens demand that their lives can be enjoyed with maximum quality, with time dedicated to leisure and free time, with favorable conditions for working and in an urban or rural environment that offers well-being.
The State must know how to respond to these new demands from society, which no longer just wants to have a job and a family, but also seeks other forms of fulfillment.
This requirement must be especially taken into account among certain social classes.
This is what happens to senior citizens who deserve to be able to fully realize themselves at this stage of their lives, in an environment that provides them with the necessary conditions.
In addition to the transversal aspects related to quality of life, the PS will carry out a specific agenda that it will create in this area for senior citizens and will pay special attention to two areas that also require specific attention:
sport, as a means of personal fulfillment and providing a healthy life
and the defense of consumer rights, as a way of protecting the user in the purchases and acquisitions that they have to make every day.
An agenda for everyone’s quality of life
Quality of life begins with the physical, mental and emotional well-being of each of us.
Individual responsibility for health and disease prevention and treatment can be facilitated and enhanced by public initiatives or support.
In a very aged country, policies must adapt to this reality.
Digital contact and information networks, active aging programs and sport are crucial instruments for everyone's quality of life.
Launch, in close connection with local authorities, of programs for cities and towns friendly to the elderly and citizens with reduced mobility (urban renewal, home automation and transport);
Promotion of inclusive mobility for all citizens, creating accessible and economically self-sustainable mobility systems for the population over 65 years of age;
Inclusion of the elderly population in community service programs with the aim of supporting and assisting the teaching of disadvantaged young people;
Creation of technological platforms to facilitate the integration of senior citizens with reduced mobility, helping to reduce the social exclusion of these groups;
Inclusion of the unemployed population in local communities through volunteer programs with senior citizens with the aim of supporting them and promoting the adoption of more socially active lifestyles,
also increasing the feeling of security in older communities.
Support the development of home teleconsultation programs and digital applications for individual health.
Support telemedicine development programs by taking advantage of available bandwidth to facilitate consultations between doctor and patient, through “online” images;
Program for the application and valorization of digital applications that improve life in cities, such as online water and air quality monitoring;
b) Single intermodal transport ticket on your cell phone;
c) Useful municipal information by georeferencing;
d) purchase of tickets via mobile phone for cultural and entertainment offers or through the municipal portal;
e) ubiquitous Municipal Services;
f) Internet on public transport and in parks and gardens;
g) virtual shopping centers in traditional trade areas;
Continue with the elimination of barriers to mobility in public spaces, promote Portugal as a tourist destination friendly to people with limited mobility;
Sustainably develop nature tourism and outdoor activities, mapping the visitable routes of Parks and Natural Reserves, long-distance walking and cycling routes and nature sports.
Promote sport as a form of personal fulfillment and a healthy life.
The PS proposes a new agenda for national sport capable of giving a new impetus to the development of sport and significantly increasing its practice.
The focus is on a sports development strategy based on a Quality of Life perspective, which promotes the generalization of sports practice, reconciling motor development with physical fitness.
A strategy that invests in local sports offerings and guarantees real accessibility for citizens to practice sports and physical activity, through more efficient use of existing infrastructure and equipment.
This sport development model aims to promote more and better sport for more citizens, starting with training at school,
continuing the development of sport through the associative movement based on clubs and federations
and generalizing sports practice in active partnership with local authorities and health, education, environment, tourism and territorial development and planning policies.
It is also intended to guarantee equal access to sporting activities without social, physical or gender discrimination.
This new agenda for national sport is framed by four essential factors: available resources,
the lasting guarantee of sustainability,
a new contract of trust and autonomy between the State
and sports agents and the ambition to achieve more and better sport.
To this end, the PS will adopt the following measures: Support and publicize projects and initiatives that promote the generalization of physical activity and sport, covering the diversity of the Portuguese population, aiming to create lifelong habits that have direct benefits for the Quality of Life and Health.
The measure will be carried out in cooperation and partnership with local authorities, sports associations, higher education and the private sector;
Articulate sports policy with the School, reinforcing physical education and sports activities in schools and higher education establishments, c
making sporting activity compatible with school and academic careers
and valuing and supporting the resurgence of sports competitions in schools;
Promote the qualification of technicians and agents involved in sport,
increase the technical qualifications of coaches,
and update the diagnostic instruments of the sporting reality, in cooperation and partnership with the education and professional training system;
Support high-performance athletes and coaches, Olympic and Paralympic projects and high-performance sports participation;
Implement a talent detection program,
promote the international dimension of Portuguese sport,
and reinforce cooperation with CPLP, Ibero-American and European Union countries;
Simplify the State’s contractual relationship in supporting sport,
modernize and reform public sports administration services,
and value the intervention of sports agents and institutions in the National Sports Council;
Implement the sports ethics program and assume public responsibility for the management of sports heritage.
Create a program that allows all public or publicly funded spaces in the country with potential for sporting activities to be monetized, allowing any citizen to make an online reservation for any of these spaces for sporting activities;
Rehabilitate and modernize sports infrastructures,
improve the management of the Centro Desportivo Nacional do Jamor, high-performance centers and public sports infrastructures,
invest in the construction of basic and local sports equipment and infrastructure,
and update the Good Project Practices Manual and the National Sports Charter;
Define a new framework of commitment and relationship with the entities that make up the sports system, which improves the allocation of resources from the State Budget, social games, and online gaming and betting, taxation, patronage and European funds,
and increase private sector investment through corporate and business social responsibility.
Defend consumer rights
Our quality of life will be better if we are more informed, more demanding consumers,
if the representation of our interests is effective,
if consumer conflicts are quickly resolved,
if companies that offer products or services are held responsible for being on the market without respecting the rules,
understand that quality is differentiating and a competitive factor
and if regulatory bodies effectively enforce consumer protection rules.
The quality of life of citizens also depends on a framework of stability and guaranteed rights relating to the acts that they have to carry out in their daily lives or with which they necessarily have to deal.
To defend consumer rights, the PS will adopt the following measures:
End contracts at a single point, through a single channel: simplify communication of contract termination,
allowing the consumer to communicate the termination of contracts regarding essential public services and services where the use of membership contracts is more frequent through a single electronic means, available on the Citizen's Portal, being exempt from any additional formalities or the sending of additional correspondence, with service providers notified electronically;
Improve the complaints book and ensure that it is an effective instrument:
The obligation to have a complaints book should be generalized across sectors and electronic media and its regime revised in order to oblige the complained company to try to repair the situation prior to sending it to ASAE and the respective regulatory entity.
The impossibility of repair must be justified with the shipment.
The possibility of the complaints book being a basis for compensation and not just for the application of a possible fine must also be assessed;
Limit the possibility of commercial contacts by telephone and email to recipients who are included on an advertising and commercial contact authorization list;
Strengthen, generalize and speed up the extrajudicial resolution of consumer disputes, namely through the use of mechanisms that encourage or oblige the use of arbitration courts to resolve disputes that, due to their size, cannot be resolved in judicial courts and that require a quick and cheap response, with the force of a court decision;
Create a protection framework for consumers in vulnerable situations when, due to their domestic economy, they are unable to pay their electricity, water or gas bills and the cut in supply or execution of their goods could further deteriorate their situation and irremediably affect the possibility of it being rebalanced;
Support programs to combat over-indebtedness with a view to rebalancing and recovering the client and not their insolvency and worsening of their situation, namely through the reinforcement of financial mediation mechanisms in the event of default;
Strengthen the rights of users and consumers of essential Public Services (water, waste treatment, electricity and gas, telecommunications).
7. A NEW GENERATION OF HOUSING POLICIES
Housing is a fundamental right of first importance.
It constitutes the basis of a stable and cohesive society, as well as the foundation from which citizens build the conditions to access other rights, such as education, health, work or personal fulfillment.
Currently, however, we are witnessing a paradigm shift, which creates the opportunity to boost the rental market and urban rehabilitation, but if it is not accompanied by the necessary policy measures, it could generate a new housing crisis, which forces us to reconsider this topic as a national priority.
A new generation of politics is a priority.
Due to the austerity policies carried out by the PSD/CDS government, many families are no longer able to meet their mortgage loan obligations and, as a result, have lost or are at risk of losing their home.
Such families, who in the past invested heavily in their housing, now find themselves not only in a dramatic situation, but also deprived of the main destination for their life savings.
Other households, who have not yet lost their home, have difficulty ensuring payment for essential services such as water, gas or electricity, which in itself represents a housing shortage.
The PS will not turn its back on these people.
On the contrary, you will find answers to the most pressing situations, whether through the protection of those who are under threat of seizure of their family home,
whether through the creation of a rental market under economically accessible conditions,
and, as a last resort, through a new housing policy, a new social policy of inclusive and non-stigmatizing housing.
It is important to ensure that everyone has decent living conditions.
This involves, in particular, combating the precariousness that still exists in our housing stock,
for promoting the consolidation of urban areas with illegal origins,
but, above all, for encouraging the restoration of old buildings and, in several cases, without minimum requirements to live there.
The PS will carry out a strong and determined commitment to urban rehabilitation, both of buildings and public spaces.
This focus will focus primarily on historic centers and degraded urban or peri-urban areas, in need of a serious requalification effort and with a lack of essential equipment or services.
But the focus on urban rehabilitation will not be limited to these areas, but will instead take on a universal vocation, and must become an exception to the rule.
That is, instead of new construction, we mainly need to renew the built heritage.
This orientation simultaneously serves several purposes: it favors the repopulation of urban centers;
improves the quality of life of fragile socioeconomic segments and those at risk of exclusion;
promotes greater energy efficiency;
and stimulates the construction sector, creating jobs in an area heavily affected by the crisis.
To achieve these objectives, the PS will carry out the measures detailed below.
Priority to urban rehabilitation
The existence of vacant buildings or fractions, resulting in the failure to take advantage of their social and productive function, constitutes a factor harmful to the public interest, as it reduces the supply of dwellings, commercial spaces or services and available land, increased in this way artificially prices, which makes access to housing difficult,
harms the development of economic activities and promotes insecurity,
desertification and urban decline.
Furthermore, the poor state of conservation of many buildings or even neighborhoods,
not only affects the living conditions of those who live there,
as it seriously harms the quality of the urban environment,
the health and safety of populations and the socioeconomic development of urban agglomerations.
As this phenomenon is increasingly widespread, it must be addressed not only based on geographical location parameters (such as, for example, ARU – Urban Rehabilitation Areas),
but based on criteria such as the state of conservation and occupation of the properties.
In this context, the PS will: Promote the rehabilitation of dilapidated buildings and the reoccupation of vacant buildings and dwellings,
namely by applying incentives and tax benefits for rehabilitation to any urban territories;
Associating investment in urban rehabilitation with an increase in the seismic resistance of buildings and a strong energy efficiency component, encouraging the use of insulating and intelligent materials,
as well as equipment that allows energy savings,
the use of solar energy for thermal effects and/or electrical microgeneration, with a view to reducing the ecological footprint;
Create a “National Fund for the Rehabilitation of Buildings”, with capital and public management (part of the initial capital can be incorporated through the delivery of public buildings in need of rehabilitation), but which private parties can access by handing over their building/fraction.
This fund will be responsible for the rehabilitation and management of its building stock, placing it on the market after its rehabilitation, being directed in particular towards the rental of “affordable housing”, thereby recovering its initial investment in the medium term;
Finance, through a competitive procedure, at least 25 Local Action Plans for the rehabilitation of urban areas, with a view to carrying out physical interventions in historic centers and disadvantaged urban areas or those with an illegal origin.
These plans will consist of a medium-term commitment (8 years) with the rehabilitation of a given area, and must be equipped with the necessary resources to carry out an effective transformation in the territories in which they operate, reversing declining trends and promoting sustained local development, which will maintain after the intervention;
Inventory available buildings (municipal or private) and create conditions, through cooperation between local government, owners and entrepreneurs, for the installation of anchor businesses, shared services and/or urban proximity equipment, promoting the local economy and, at the same time, the conversion of aged or degraded areas;
Consolidate Urban Areas of Illegal Genesis (AUGI), favoring, in close coordination with local authorities, their conversion and legalization;
Emphasize conservation.
Construction and urban planning regulations were, for many decades, oriented towards new construction and not towards the conservation of buildings.
Recently, this imbalance was partially addressed through the approval of “exceptional regimes” relating to urban rehabilitation, which treat it as a particular and temporary case.
However, the new reality requires not only that rehabilitation no longer be seen as “the exception”, but also that conservation interventions be treated as a priority;
Strengthen the capacity of municipalities to replace non-compliant owners and carry out coercive and conditional works in buildings that are vacant or in ruins as a result of undivided inheritances, also providing for reimbursement mechanisms for works that make these operations financially viable for municipalities;
Review the rental regime, in order to adapt the value of rents to the state of conservation of the buildings, thus encouraging their rehabilitation;
Simplify rules and procedures, in order to accelerate the carrying out of conservation works and urban rehabilitation operations;
Simplify and reduce context costs related to the eviction process.
Encourage the expanded supply of affordable rental housing
It is necessary to respond to new housing needs, which today extend to the middle class, particularly young people, as a result of falling incomes, unemployment and the unavailability of the traditional instrument for accessing housing (easy and cheap mortgage credit).
The aim, as an alternative, is to promote a wide range of affordable housing for rent which, although not traditional social housing, allows meeting the needs of those who, having the means to guarantee accommodation at affordable costs, are currently excluded from the housing market. .
With this objective, the PS will launch a new concept of “affordable housing”, for public or private promotion, whose landlords practice moderate rental values, that is, with a profitable intention but below the market price and in line with the average household income. relatives.
In this way, the aim is to create conditions for the elderly, young people and families to settle in urban centers, close to work, school, shops and their leisure activities.
To this end, the following instruments will have to be used: Granting bank guarantees for loans for rehabilitation works intended for rental under the “affordable housing” regime;
Provision of public buildings/fractions for sale at reduced costs, with the commitment that the properties will be rehabilitated and intended for rental under an “affordable housing” regime, particularly by young people, for a minimum number of years;
Creation of “affordable housing” grants, namely through the mobilization of funds – in an amount not exceeding 10% – from the Social Security Financial Stabilization Fund for investment in income buildings (acquisition and rehabilitation of vacant dwellings with a view to renting in “affordable housing” regime), which not only guarantee a rate of return in line with the average profitability of that fund (possibly combining affordable rents with rents at market prices),
how they can contribute to other important objectives at national level, such as urban rehabilitation and repopulation and rejuvenation of historic centers;
Creation of rent insurance, designed to protect “affordable housing” landlords against the risk of default;
Review and deepening of the Porta 65 Program, expressly associating it with the concept of “affordable housing”, in order to facilitate and expand young people’s access to the rental market, preferably for rehabilitated properties,
and extending this program to commercial leasing as well, with a view to encouraging the opening of new stores and the launch of entrepreneurial projects by young people;
Elimination of the tax incentive regime attributed to Real Estate Investment Funds, maintaining only the benefits attributed to the remaining urban rehabilitation promoters;
Guarantee the extension of the period for updating rents in order to guarantee the right to housing, especially for retirees, retirees and those over 65 years of age, without prejudice to the regulation of rental subsidies.
Prevent housing foreclosures
Proof that, contrary to the rhetoric used by the PSD and CDS, the crisis has unfortunately not yet passed is the fact that the number of families in default on their mortgage loans continues to grow.
It is urgent to take care of these situations, preventing and combating the displacement of families resulting from seizures whose debts cannot be satisfied.
By acting in this sense, the State will not only be preventing situations of extreme need, but also avoiding possible sources of exclusion and social tensions.
To this end, the PS will mobilize a wide range of instruments, such as: Prohibition of tax foreclosures on the family home in relation to debts worth less than the value of the asset forfeited and suspension of the seizure of the family home in other cases ;
Establishment of an Ethical Bank, in collaboration with the solidarity sector and interested local authorities, which can contribute to alleviating the over-indebtedness situation of families
supporting structured renegotiation with creditors and granting small low-interest loans to address specific and temporary difficulties for households at risk of losing their home;
Local counseling service regarding homelessness: offering local integrated counseling services (financial, legal and social) to support families in a dramatic situation of imminent loss of their home;
Exceptional regime for the protection of the debtor in the event of the foreclosure of a property secured by a mortgage, stipulating that, in situations of substantial reduction in the household's income and regardless of the creditor's consent, the delivery of the property (payment in payment) extinguishes the debt until to the limit of the bank assessment carried out (assuming the unity of all credits granted to complete the purchase and sale);
Modification of the rules applicable to determining the base value for the sale of properties in the foreclosure process.
Relaunch social housing policy
In recent decades, and essentially on the impulse of the PS, much has been done in terms of providing social accommodation and eradicating precarious housing.
However, in more recent years, the pursuit of a social housing policy has stagnated, which occurred precisely at a time when social conditions, the risk of poverty and unemployment worsened, accompanied by a significant reduction in social support.
The new housing crisis we are experiencing justifies the need to relaunch social housing policy, adapting it to new needs and improving its responses.
In this context, the PS will: Complete the implementation of the PIMP (Medium-Term Intervention Plan) and PER (Special Rehousing Program) programs, resume PER Famílias and create a similar program for consolidated and degraded buildings;
Strengthen investment, through community funds, in the rehabilitation and improvement of the energy efficiency of the existing social housing stock, as well as in the rehabilitation of vacant buildings for social housing purposes;
Create a network of supported housing (preferably in existing buildings to be rehabilitated), under a “family pension” regime, for people with low levels of resources, in situations of isolation or exclusion (in particular the elderly) and whose social and psychological situation or psychiatric treatment makes access to common housing unlikely;
Promote participatory management of social neighborhoods, by strengthening the participation and involvement of social tenants.
B. VALUE OUR TERRITORY
The territory is the only strategic asset that we have full availability of, not depending on third parties for its valorization.
It is therefore important to take advantage of all its potential, promoting balanced, harmonious and ecologically sustainable economic development, through rational use of our endogenous resources.
To achieve this, traditional activities and crafts will have to be combined with the new possibilities opened up by technical advances, scientific discoveries and the influx of innovation and knowledge, but always with respect for the diversity and natural richness of our territory.
This territorial development strategy will be carried out on two fronts.
Not the thriving coastline and the interior that comes by drag.
But two facades – the Atlantic and the peninsular – are equally worthy, which both open onto vast markets, with countless opportunities to explore.
In the case of the Atlantic façade, the extension of the continental shelf constitutes a unique moment in contemporary Portuguese history, transforming the notion we have of our territory, into one of the largest spaces of national sovereignty and jurisdiction on a global scale.
This dimension carries with it, on the one hand, the awareness of the Sea as a profound national identity
and, on the other, the responsibility and obligation to exercise national sovereignty on a new scale.
At the same time, this is also a unique opportunity for Portugal to take a leading role in the blue economy and growth, transforming the enormous potential into real growth and employment, guided by the principle of sustainability.
In the case of the peninsular façade, the PS proposes to replace a peripheral, conformist and immobile conception of the “interior” with a strategic aim of economic affirmation and modernization of the productive fabric, especially in border regions.
We must look at the Iberian Peninsula as a whole and explore the enormous potential that this large economic space holds, taking advantage not only of our location, but also of the differentiating characteristics and competitive advantages of national products.
To this end, it is necessary, first of all, to promote correct spatial planning, which allows the launch of intelligent, mobilizing and sustainable development strategies.
Strategies that must involve both the continent and the islands, both the coast and the interior, both cities and rural areas.
And, preferably, both in combination, enhancing synergies and increasing their respective competitiveness,
while promoting the environment as a development factor.
This will not only achieve effective territorial cohesion, but also authentic sustainable development.
With regard to rural areas, specifically, it is important to value agricultural activity, promote regional products, rejuvenate the business community and modernize management techniques, expanding markets.
On the other hand, forestry exploitation must be professionalized, increasing the productivity of the main sectors and preventing fires.
All these development vectors, with direct territorial expression, must be promoted in an integrated and spatially coherent manner, safeguarding natural values.
This integration also implies raising awareness among all citizens of the rights and duties in relation to the territory
and the need for each person to contribute to strengthening the quality of the urban and rural environment.
8. SEA: A BET ON THE FUTURE
Maritime spaces under national sovereignty or jurisdiction – the Territorial Sea, the 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and the extended continental shelf within the scope of the proposal presented by the Portuguese government to the United Nations – constitute one of the main assets for future development from the country.
The extension of the continental shelf will convert Portuguese territory into around 4,000,000 km².
The resources that these spaces contain – biological, genetic, mineral, energy, etc. –, open up exploration perspectives that could transform the future of Portugal.
The achievement of this aim must be based on a medium and long-term strategy, aimed at prospecting and exploring new spaces and resources,
supported by scientific knowledge and technological development
and aiming to create a technology-based business fabric that has the sea as the center of its activity.
On the other hand, it is important to consolidate traditional maritime activities (fishing, fish processing, aquaculture, naval industry, tourism, recreational boating)
and enhance Portugal's strategic position in the Atlantic, strengthening and modernizing national ports and connecting them to the trans-European transport network in response to the intensification of maritime transport.
Finally, faced with the implications of climate change (which manifest itself in particular in the rise in average sea levels and the increase in the number and intensity of storms and other climate risks), it is necessary to take measures to mitigate the negative impacts of which we already have ample demonstration in our coastal area.
This is a program that clearly responds to the challenges of the blue economy and the green economy,
at the same time as it affirms our sovereignty and reinforces Portugal's position in the world, taking advantage of its Euro-Atlantic centrality.
The PS is committed to economic activities traditionally linked to the Sea,
but also in the search for new areas of excellence and the creation of business opportunities that lead to the generation of qualified employment,
the increase in exports and
to the conversion of declining areas into emerging maritime industries.
We boldly invest in knowledge, innovation and conservation of the marine environment as drivers of economic development.
We face the challenge of simplification without facilitation.
We promote the sustainable use of sea resources
with the reinforcement of the national geostrategic position, capturing more wealth in the creation of the “Portuguese Sea”.
Establish an effective presence in our Sea
An effective presence is a fundamental element in affirming and defending Portugal's interest in its Sea.
Establishing this presence involves, on the one hand, boosting maritime activities, namely commercial, fishing and recreational navies, scientific research, mining and energy transformation platforms, tourism and leisure.
On the other hand, and at the same time, it implies exercising our authority in relation to maritime spaces under national sovereignty and jurisdiction, ensuring visible supervision of their uses and occupations.
To this end, the PS will: Implement a coherent monitoring and intervention device, which integrates ships, aircraft and modern surveillance systems in order to ensure the observance of law, order and human security in spaces under national sovereignty and jurisdiction.
It is important, in particular, to ensure surveillance of the EEZ, in the Azores, beyond 100 miles, in order to avoid the abusive capture of fish resources by foreign vessels;
Guarantee an adequate defense and security capacity for our sea, sufficiently dissuasive of external claims of interests antagonistic to those of Portugal;
Uncompromisingly defend the public interest in partnerships, licenses and concessions to be undertaken.
Promote better marine management
The management of the sea is absolutely vital and an indispensable condition for its sustainable use.
However, recent legislation does not yet offer the necessary integrated vision, does not ensure proper articulation with other planning instruments, nor does it respect the autonomy and sphere of competence specific to the autonomous regions.
Thus, the PS will promote a review of the normative framework applicable to maritime planning, ensuring its compatibility with other sectoral and special programs,
clarifying and providing stability to the planning options made,
safeguarding regional autonomies
and establishing action priorities that affirm Portugal as a maritime country that preserves its natural capital,
values ​​the services of marine ecosystems,
investment in value-added businesses and industries
and technologically evolved,
creating the necessary conditions for valuing the economic, environmental and social dimensions.
“Blue Fund” for the development of the sea economy
The start of many new activities linked to the sea economy,
the protection of natural heritage, including the management of the risk associated with new uses of the sea,
Scientific research and business R&D require large initial investments that must be promoted through a dedicated fund, which will combine public investment, risk capital and contributions associated with the new activities to be licensed.
Under these terms, the PS will create a “Blue Fund” for the development of the maritime economy, scientific research and the protection and monitoring of the marine environment.
This instrument will be financed by the allocation of part of the revenue from the fee for the use of maritime space and through other alternative resources generated from the private sector at national and international level, as well as through the OE and community funds.
Program to promote Marine Sciences and Technologies
Scientific research, fundamental and applied, in fields related to the sea is of critical importance.
This requires, first and foremost, dedicated technological infrastructures and participation in international scientific networks.
Research in this area requires observing, mapping and monitoring the ocean, both directly and remotely.
Portugal must organize existing and marine research platforms into a network, seeking synergies in the technological standards required for modern, fruitful and competitive research.
It is therefore important to empower the country with a research network dedicated to marine sciences, allowing the country to assert itself as a strategic power in the exploration of the oceans.
Furthermore, the existence of a solid pool of researchers in marine sciences is fundamental for the consolidation of the sea as a strategic asset, in the context of a knowledge society.
Thus, the PS will launch a program to boost Marine Sciences and Technologies, focused on recovering and reinforcing investment in R&D at sea and creating scientific jobs and incentives for business R&D. This program will allow:
Qualify national R&D in marine science and technology, in priority areas for the country;
Install an Ocean Observation Center in the Azores, with fixed and mobile facilities, supported by existing international partnerships and to be developed within the scope of Horizon 2020, in particular its component for the Atlantic.
Based on this investment, research programs and subprograms will be structured, in cooperation with international networks (namely at the Atlantic level) dedicated to marine sciences, which will help to respond to different lines of scientific research in the marine area, including in the fields of robotics, biology, oceanography and volcanology;
Recreate specific and dedicated training mechanisms for the higher training of employees in marine sciences;
Increase the number of doctorates in marine sciences in research and training centers, supporting teaming programs and enhancing their insertion in companies and industry;
Increase national scientific production and R&D in marine sciences, creating a specific program of R&D projects that includes the participation of companies;
Establish incentives for technological companies, creating units of knowledge with the potential to be economically exploited, namely through the registration of patents;
Promote employment in the naval industry (construction of equipment and support ships for O&G and Offshore Mining – qualified engineering and technicians);
Promote the production of skills, the development of technologies and new materials essential for offshore intervention.
Harnessing marine genetic resources
The growth in the exploration of marine genetic resources and the potential they hold, especially for the pharmaceutical, agri-food and cosmetics industries, reveals an area for the future.
In the Portuguese maritime space there are very promising perspectives regarding these resources.
The leadership of this process must rest with the public sector and be affirmative.
Thus, for the PS, the State must move beyond the passive position of recipient of requests for authorization for marine scientific research, to a position of promoter of dynamics between investing companies and the scientific community, enhancing Portuguese participation in emerging marine activities.
Deep Sea Oil and Mining Technological Cluster Portugal
To take advantage of all the potential that opens up with the expansion of the Portuguese continental shelf and the scientific and technological potential that the country has developed, especially in the areas of engineering, we must invest in the creation of a technological and applied research cluster in the areas of digital oil and mineral fields and offshore and subsea naval engineering,
aiming at the emergence of start-ups in these areas.
Protect natural capital and value marine ecosystem services
Ensuring effective protection of natural capital and marine ecosystem services is essential for their valorization within the blue economy.
In this context, the PS will: Promote the introduction of sustainability seals in different areas, including fishing, vessels, ports, marinas, biotechnology, extractive activities, etc.;
Define an ecologically coherent national network of marine protected areas, taking as a basis and expanding the experience of the Autonomous Region of the Azores;
Implement management plans for marine protected areas,
map the services of the respective marine ecosystems
and ensure the monitoring of marine fauna and accidental captures caused by the fishing industry;
Raise awareness among everyone involved in maritime economy activities and society in general about the importance of blue natural capital and the need for its valorization.
Simplex do Mar
Also regarding the sea, bureaucracy must be eliminated, making the State more agile and facilitating the exercise of economic activities.
The aim is to achieve greater speed, but with guaranteed quality and responsibility in the decision-making process, ensuring greater security and clarity in relations with the Public Administration,
reducing context costs and increasing competitiveness.
Therefore, the PS government will: Simplify the Maritime Registration Regulations – RIM, particularly with a view to speeding up the training of seafarers;
Implement the Single Logistics Window (JUL), as an extension of the Single Port Window (JUP) system, currently in operation in all national ports, extending it to all means of land transport, trucks and trains, in all ports Portuguese and in connection with national and Spanish dry ports to Madrid;
Create the Single Invoice per Ship Call, making the representation of all State entities in the ports (AP, AM, AT, SEF, and SM) unique, resulting in a direct reduction in costs per ship call and savings in around 600,000 sheets of paper/year for every 3,000 ships;
Introduce the legal concept of “dry port”, aiming to facilitate the concentration and clearance of goods that circulate between temporary warehouses under a simplified regime, increasing the competitiveness of ports and the national export sector;
Create the “Plataforma Mar”, a single window for licensing economic activities to be carried out in the marine environment;
Simplify licensing, inspections and inspections of recreational and fishing vessels and nautical charts, as well as excessive procedures and requirements associated with water sports.
Modernization of port infrastructure and connections to international hinterlands
In a scenario in which Portugal is already well equipped with various types of infrastructure, the country's competitiveness requires that investment be selected, judicious and aimed at critical success factors for Portugal's competitiveness.
The Sea sector constitutes a bet for the future, where the improvement of port and railway conditions and infrastructure, particularly in the area of ​​goods, is absolutely vital,
providing the country with infrastructure capable of taking advantage of new opportunities, including those resulting from the change in global maritime container traffic due to the widening of the Panama Canal.
Therefore, without calling into question the rigor in the choice of investments and allocation of public funds and observing the methodology defined in this Electoral Program regarding the planning and execution of public works of significant size, based on political dialogue with other party forces and social actors relevant, the PS will propose a plan to increase the capacity of port infrastructures, as well as rail connections to European hinterlands, with priority given to connecting the port of Sines to the rail network.
Promote Maritime Transport
Given its geographical position, Portugal can and should assert itself as a power, not only in port and logistical terms, but also in terms of maritime transport.
Thus, the PS will: Support the development of the national Merchant Navy, through European benchmarking that allows the most favorable legal and fiscal conditions found to be replicated in Portugal, in compliance with applicable European and international rules.
In this way, the aim is to increase the number of ships flying the national flag
and provide the country with a supply of cargo capacity, reducing the almost absolute dependence that currently exists on international shipping and simultaneously increasing the employment offer for Portuguese crew members;
Improve access conditions to island cabotage and inter-island transport, eliminating constraints on companies' access to the market, reinforcing control mechanisms and guaranteeing stopovers and delivery times for goods;
Support short sea shipping and “Motorways of the Sea”.
This boost should be done with services between national ports and certain ports in Europe in specific segments of goods and in conjunction with road transporters so that it constitutes a sustainable alternative.
Value fishing and economic activities linked to fishing
One of the most important and relevant maritime resources is its fish, and it is important to value this economic activity as a competitive business project, given our traditions in this sector.
To this end, the PS defends: Sustainable management of fishing resources in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), taking into account the economic, social and environmental components;
The development of the fish processing sector, reinforcing the focus on canning activities and innovative industries related to the processing of fishing and aquaculture products, particularly through technological and knowledge partnerships between Universities, the sector and companies ;
The creation of a brand for national fish,
as well as a traceability and consumer information system that identifies national fish, from production to the final consumer;
Support for the acquisition of the first vessel by young fishermen with the creation of a “Young Fishermen” credit line, aimed at sustainable financing of investment supported under PO MAR 2014-2020, through the elaboration of protocols with banking entities;
The creation of partnerships between fishermen's organizations and independent scientific bodies, aimed at valuing fish and ensuring the sustainability of resources, within the scope of Local Fisheries Action Groups;
Strengthening Producer Organizations (OP), with greater integration in the agri-food value chain, through increased scale and a clear market orientation;
Certification and promotion of fishing and aquaculture products;
The restructuring of the 1st sale, through greater involvement of producer organizations and traders' associations, particularly with a view to allowing the direct sale of local fishing;
The concession of smaller auctions and, with the agreement of the sector, “virtual auctions” or other non-face-to-face bidding mechanisms that increase competition between buyers,
maintaining the regulation of activity and ensuring compliance with European obligations in the context of sustainable public service provision;
The possibility of carrying out maritime-tourist activities and professional fishing simultaneously, as a way of improving the profitability of the fleet;
The priority in prioritizing applications for PO MAR 2014-2020, particularly in improving safety conditions on board
and increasing the energy efficiency of vessels, through the conversion/acquisition of engines with lower polluting emissions;
The creation of a “Small Fishing” credit line aimed at sustainable financing of investment supported under PO MAR 2014-2020, through the elaboration of protocols with banking entities;
Support for the distant/industrial fishing fleet operating in international waters, through the reinforcement of bilateral agreements with third countries, particularly those negotiated within the EU framework;
Improving the safety and operational conditions of fishing port infrastructures;
The deepening of bilateral fishing relations with Spain, Norway and Canada.
Bet on aquaculture
It is important to encourage the increase in aquaculture production and its diversification, both for domestic consumption and export, setting concrete objectives for production quantities.
Therefore, the PS government will: Proceed with the definition and organization of areas destined to the practice of aquaculture;
Resume semi-intensive and extensive bivalve aquaculture in estuaries and estuaries, through simplified licensing procedures;
Launch an offshore aquaculture program;
Create a common platform for managing information for aquaculture establishments;
Support the introduction, with due precautions, of new species;
Promote the consumption of species from aquaculture produced in Portugal;
Develop products with added value certification of origin in the market;
Promote innovative technologies and equipment and the use of renewable energy;
Implement aquaculture insurance and create financial instruments for mutual guarantee and risk capital, in order to leverage investment and facilitate access to bank credit under more advantageous conditions.
Defend and enhance the coast
One of the great added values ​​of the Portuguese territory is the extension of its coastline, both on the mainland and on the islands, as well as the multiple uses and opportunities that it offers.
In this area, the PS will: Explore land-sea interactions, aiming to transform the Portuguese coastline into a maritime region of international reference, in terms of quality and innovation;
Carry out coordination between planning and territorial management instruments in land and maritime spaces, making multiple coastal activities compatible and dynamic, in order to enhance the respective value chains;
Adopt measures to counter the growing erosion of vulnerable areas in the coastal zone, seriously studying its causes and involving populations, regional governments, coastal municipalities, research centers and other interested parties in the decision-making process;
Adopt a firm stance to restore legality and combat proven unauthorized constructions in maritime public domain, intervening as a priority in areas at greatest risk, with the requalification and preservation of environmental values ​​and safeguarding the first homes in fishing residential areas;
Recover and enhance the natural and cultural heritage of riverside communities.
Explore Sea-Air Interaction
It is also necessary to adopt an integrated vision that articulates maritime space and air space in their different potentialities, removing once and for all, not only the land-sea dichotomy, but also the land/sea-air dichotomy.
To this end, the PS will: Strengthen the means of regulating the aviation sector in order to ensure that airport and air transport activities are aligned with the national development strategy and the competitiveness requirements for air transport in European space and intercontinental;
Affirm Portugal's position within the framework of the Single European Sky, by strengthening the dynamism of agents involved in the provision of air navigation, air transport and airport services, as a means of defending Portugal's interests.
9. AFFIRM THE “INTERIOR” AS CENTRALITY IN THE IBERIAN MARKET
Alongside the Atlantic façade and the archipelagic seas, a new look at the “interior” is needed, a new vision that identifies the border regions as a new centrality in the Iberian market.
The interior of mainland Portugal constitutes, from the outset, a promising connection membrane with the rest of the Peninsula, enjoying a privileged position in the Iberian context that has not been duly valued.
In the Spanish regions close to the border, 6 million people live (14 million, if we include Andalusia).
The border provinces alone have 3.3 million inhabitants.
Furthermore, the capitals of our border districts are only between 60 and 160 kilometers away from the capitals of neighboring provinces.
Thus, the so-called “interior” is, after all, at the center of the Iberian market, a market with around 60 million consumers and a gigantic volume of exchanges.
Therefore, from now on, border areas must be seen as an extensive commercial interface.
But it's not just about promoting cross-border trade.
To sell you need to produce.
And the truth is that our territory has significant productive capacity that is currently being wasted.
In the so-called “interior” there are infrastructures, labor, unique resources and artisanal knowledge that are underutilized or even at risk of being lost.
And that, through an influx of innovation, technology and management methods, can generate considerable added value.
Basically, there is an enormous dormant potential in rural areas and small and medium-sized cities that must be revived and put at the service of national progress.
To this end, it is necessary, first of all, to promote correct and balanced spatial planning.
It is necessary to stimulate network development, creating urban-rural partnerships, coalitions between medium-sized cities and launching projects supported by scientific and knowledge production institutions.
It is necessary to intensify cross-border cooperation.
Finally, it is necessary to repopulate and revive low-density territories.
Mission unity for the valorization of the interior
The PS will create a mission unit for the valorization of the interior, directly dependent on the Prime Minister, with responsibilities to create, implement and supervise a national program for territorial cohesion,
as well as promoting the development of the interior territory.
Valorization of production spaces
In recent decades, a great effort and investment has been made in the valorization and qualification of consumption spaces – that is, in tourist areas, in living spaces and leisure areas, etc. – resulting in an undeniable increase in the attractiveness of cities, public spaces and riverside areas, among others.
Without denying the clear added value that these actions have in improving the quality of life of citizens and the growth of tourism,
At this point, it becomes strategic to redirect these valorization efforts towards the country's production spaces, especially those in the interior, which in many cases are on a strong downward trend and represent a wide spectrum of underutilized resources with potential for job creation. and wealth.
It is therefore important to invest strategically in qualifying and increasing the attractiveness of production spaces, whether this production is in the primary or secondary sector, with a view to increasing employment,
the attractiveness for investment,
the use of resources,
modernization and population settlement, particularly in the interior.
The PS will prioritize investment in the modernization of endogenous, regional and, in many cases, traditional products and production infrastructures, in order to provide them with the necessary requirements to be attractive and competitive today, at the same time that give rise to unique products with added value in the global world.
Entrepreneurial municipalities in a network
The PS will launch a package of incentives for sharing work spaces and incubating companies in the interior, favoring the exchange of information, cooperation and mobility of ideas and people between different regions, contributing, at the same time, to the occupation, refunctionalization and requalification of abandoned or obsolete industrial buildings and spaces.
Regional platforms for employability
The PS will promote forms of reinforced articulation of the training offers of higher education and vocational training institutions with the needs of companies located in different interior territories, through the creation of dialogue and partnership platforms.
Exchange of applied knowledge between R&DT centers and rural communities
Innovation and technological development are essential for economic growth and competitiveness today.
Research centers are increasingly at the heart of the economy and are the engines of innovation.
However, these are mostly located in large urban areas and, sometimes, little focused on the issues, challenges, knowledge and potential that are found in more peripheral regions, namely inland and rural areas.
Additionally, it is in these more isolated regions that knowledge and products of a local nature still exist today, with value and application for today, and with unique processes, techniques and expressions, which are at risk of being lost, both because they are disappearing -certain the bearers of this same knowledge, such as due to a lack of competitiveness and updating of the goods produced.
Thus, encouraging an exchange of knowledge, with a strong applied aspect, between R&DT centers and rural communities will allow:
Preserve and transmit traditional knowledge, knowledge and products, ensuring that the country's fundamental wealth is not lost;
Capitalize on the diversity and uniqueness of regional productions, which are increasingly an added value in the globalized world and a factor of competitiveness and differentiation;
• Study and develop new products that combine tradition and innovation, creating a type of wealth rooted in territories and that promote national materials, resources, culture and image;
Create products that essentially depend on endogenous resources for their production and with great export potential;
Promote the creation of jobs and wealth in declining areas, combating rural exodus and territorial asymmetries.
Value and promote regional products
The PS will launch an integrated certification and promotion program for regional products, namely those that combine artisanal techniques with innovation factors, highlighting their differentiating elements and increasing their competitiveness in markets outside their territories of origin.
Urban-Rural Partnerships (PUR)
Small and medium-sized cities and urban centers play an essential role in the balanced development of the territory and in promoting territorial cohesion.
The connections and interdependencies of these centers with the surrounding areas, particularly rural areas, are fundamental for both territories and for solidifying regional development, particularly in the interior.
Development options and policies for these areas must be thought of in an integrated and localized way, particularly in terms of functions, public transport, accessibility, quality of life, economic revitalization, competitiveness and increased productivity, safeguarding and enhancing cultural heritage and nature and increased tourist attractiveness.
To this end, it is essential to create urban-rural partnerships that can develop and implement in an integrated manner a regional or local development program, which capitalizes on complementarities and synergies between territories and can coordinate the various sectoral policies in favor of a strategy of development for the area in question.
Urban-Rural Partnerships (PUR) thus aim to design and implement territorial development strategies, based on a specific governance model, which clearly defines the responsibilities and competencies of the different actors involved, for a multi-annual horizon minimum of 3 years,
allowing the programming and financing of specific actions in the medium term, especially in the dimensions of mobility,
equipment networks, short food supply circuits
and integrated management of the blue system (water) and green infrastructures.
Encouraging the retention and attraction of young people
The PS will launch a package of measures that favor the attraction and retention of young people in the interior, namely through support for technology-based entrepreneurial projects,
the rehabilitation of abandoned buildings in towns and villages,
the installation of young farmers and young entrepreneurs
rural areas and positive discrimination actions in support of birth rates.
A national network of hotspots will also be launched in low-density territories.
Intensify cross-border cooperation
In order to achieve closer cross-border cooperation, the PS will:
• Negotiate with the Spanish authorities a set of common measures to improve the quality of life of people living in border regions and
reduce costs for Portuguese and Spanish companies, namely through the following measures:
• Elimination of roaming charges;
• Suppression of fees for using debit and credit cards between the two countries;
• Greater integration and fiscal recognition by both countries, eliminating double bureaucracy factors
and ensuring that citizens and companies do not need to be registered and make successive tax declarations in both countries;
• Adoption of a common commercial register, accessible online.
• Regulate and harmonize academic degrees in areas of specialized training, which allow sharing resources between universities and other higher education institutions in border areas (including joint study programs and double degrees), creating incentives for mobility of teachers, students and employees;
• Ensure integrated planning and effective articulation of the health services supply network (as well as in other areas considered priorities by municipalities) on both sides of the border, thus avoiding redundancies and waste.
Promote production and employment in border territories
The PS will implement a system of incentives for the installation of companies
and the increase in production in border territories, namely through a tax benefit, in IRC, that is modulated by the regional distribution of employment.
Therefore, the amount of the incentive for interiority will depend on the percentage of the company's workers who have tax domicile in disadvantaged or low-density regions.
This criterion is especially suitable for multi-establishment companies, avoids fraud arising from the fictitious location of the companies' legal headquarters in inland areas and is easily verifiable using available information.
10. PROMOTE TERRITORIAL COHESION AND ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Spatial planning and rural and urban planning are instruments that must be at the service of territorial development, ensuring coordination of the various sectoral policies.
Furthermore, valuing the territorial dimension of public policies constitutes an important challenge, so that the new cycle of use of European funds allows the country to develop in balanced and inclusive terms, promoting effective territorial cohesion.
This is true across the national territory as a whole, but particularly in cities, which play a decisive role as drivers of territorial competitiveness,
economic-social progress and innovation associated with demanding standards of environmental sustainability.
In this context it acquires special relevance, along with the enjoyment of green spaces and air quality,
the provision of essential public services of water supply and basic sanitation, in addition to the collection, treatment and recovery of waste.
These undoubtedly constitute sectors of relevant public interest and are central to citizens' quality of life.
As such, it is necessary to maintain these important functions under public ownership and/or control, in a delicate and virtuous balance between the Central Administration and local authorities, with the need to correct unreflective and quite harmful decisions taken in the past.
But environmental concerns are not limited to the urban water cycle or waste management, nor are they limited to the city universe.
In fact, today's main environmental threats are climate change and the loss of biodiversity.
For both, it is necessary to find a solid answer, which contributes jointly to the protection of the planet, but does not fail to take into account national specificities.
Regarding climate change, action must be taken in two areas: mitigating greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and adapting to a more unstable climate.
In terms of mitigating global warming, the EU has assumed a leadership position and Portugal has especially favorable conditions to be at the forefront of this movement.
Still, it is important to bear in mind that, no matter how much we do to stop the greenhouse effect, some of its effects will always be felt, probably quite intensely.
To this extent, and particularly given our broad coastal exposure, we must become more resilient to the impacts of climate change.
It will be necessary to identify, in the different sectoral domains, which structural and behavioral changes should be adopted to deal with a more violent and unpredictable climate.
Regarding biodiversity, it is important to promote adequate management and broad enjoyment of natural parks, but not only that.
Biological diversity must be seen as a strategic asset, even subject to economic valuation, even beyond protected areas or Natura 2000 sites.
This is what justifies, for example, the need for determined action to requalify river and wetland ecosystems.
Such an initiative must be designed in close cooperation with the Spanish authorities, in the case of international rivers.
Integrate territorial development and spatial planning
Spatial planning and rural and urban planning are instruments that must be at the service of territorial development which, by definition, is a more comprehensive concept and implies the coordination of several sectoral policies.
However, integration and interdependence between ordering/planning and territorial development has not been a reality in Portugal.
The two domains have been separated, which has led to a contradictory and counterproductive situation:
On the one hand, territorial management instruments (IGT) have a medium-term strategic program, but they lack truly effective operational programming.
On the other hand, territorial development is often reduced to the application of community funds, with operational programming instruments for interventions in territories residing here, but without close connection with the IGT and almost always requiring duplication and overlapping of plans and strategies.
It is, therefore, necessary and urgent to integrate these two domains, which must be perfectly in tune and interdependent, thereby promoting true strategic development planning and its effective operationalization.
It is also necessary to provide regional programs with a true regional perspective, through their implementation by bodies that have greater political legitimacy to represent the territories and citizens of the region, instead of being reduced, as currently, to mere instruments for programming sectoral policies of the Central Administration with impact on the territory.
Promote territorial strategies anchored in local development
The importance and impact that local development initiatives can have on territorial development (regional and even national) are today recognized by the most diverse international entities, such as the EU and the OECD.
In this context, the EU has even strengthened the instruments for promoting local development initiatives and the territorialization of public policies.
However, the transposition of these instruments was carried out poorly into the national framework, particularly with regard to the promotion of local development initiatives and the recognition of their potential to catapult development to higher territorial scales.
The PS will correct these problems and adopt territorial strategies truly anchored in local development, which will involve:•
Strengthen the role and autonomy of municipalities in terms of spatial planning and local development,
namely through strengthening the instruments for consultation, consultation and hearing of municipalities in view of the local implications of Central Administration programs
and strengthening the autonomy of municipalities when preparing urbanization and detailed plans;
• Strengthen the scope, strategic capacity, territorial representativeness and means of financing instruments to support locally based development;
• Create incentives for social innovation and territorial animation;
• Counter the non-spontaneous emergence of local initiative and self-organization, through the training of local agents and the creation of support for this type of initiatives.
“Territories of the Future” Program
The PS will encourage the creation of applied research partnerships between higher education units, local authorities, companies and other entities, in areas that are decisive for the future of cities and regions that are particularly demanding in terms of knowledge, innovation and internationalization ( circular economy, electric mobility, home automation, information technologies, new urban infrastructures, etc.).
“Smart Cities” Program
As a result of the recognition that cities can play a central role in creating jobs and growth, the PS will foresee and encourage integrated sustainable urban development interventions,
managed by municipalities,
that respond to today’s energy-environmental challenges:
less pollution,
more energy efficiency,
greater renewable energy production,
fewer greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
better mobility,
more jobs,
more inclusion and greater proximity between citizens.
Such interventions will be fundamentally based on the use of new technologies,
allowing the leverage of private investment
and the emergence of new forms of business in cities, based on the information generated by the application of integrated solutions.
Deep decarbonization of the economy
Portugal should become independent from the consumption of fossil fuels by 2050, an objective that is in line with the EU's level of ambition.
Now, around half of GHG emissions are already covered by the carbon market, with their progressive reduction foreseen and framed by this regime.
It is therefore important to act on the other half, which covers more diffuse emissions, such as those from the residential and service sectors, transport or agriculture, where it is necessary to adopt a very comprehensive and diverse set of measures.
For each of these sectors, and based on the measures foreseen in this program regarding urban rehabilitation, energy efficiency, sustainable mobility and agriculture, the PS will approve scheduled decarbonization plans.
Adaptation to new climatic contexts
Regardless of the results obtained in terms of reducing GHG emissions, climate change will manifest itself in a progressively more intense way, requiring concrete adaptation measures.
Among other effects, our territory – especially on the coast and in the largest cities – is subject to the occurrence of extreme meteorological phenomena, which are increasingly more frequent, unpredictable and more damaging.
It is therefore important, in light of the recently approved Sendai Strategy 2015-2025, to identify and map such risks,
reduce exposure and mitigate the main vulnerabilities detected,
as well as strengthening preparedness and response capacity to disasters.
To this end, the PS will: Review, update and increase the level of ambition of the National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change (ENAAC), in transversal and sectoral terms;
• Provide for the mandatory definition of municipal and/or inter-municipal strategies for adapting to climate change, depending on local realities, with necessary transposition into territorial planning plans, particularly in the context of the Municipal Master Plan (PDM);
• Prepare a national map of risks arising from climate change, predicting its development, in detail, through municipal and/or inter-municipal risk maps, as well as emergency plans by local authorities;
• Increase the resilience of essential infrastructures in the event of disasters, particularly healthcare equipment;
• Implement early warning systems and reinforce rapid reaction mechanisms to disasters.
Protect nature and prevent loss of biodiversity
Biodiversity and nature conservation constitute strategic goals that cannot, as has been the case, be continually subordinated in the name of other conflicting values.
In this field, the PS will: Ensure the effectiveness of special territorial planning programs (PEOT) that establish regimes to safeguard natural resources and values,
ensuring integrated and coherent planning and management of protected areas, as well as the seafront, estuaries and reservoirs;
• Promote the settlement of populations residing in protected areas,
encouraging sustainable development practices, particularly in the agricultural and livestock sector,
and rehabilitating the building according to its original design, but with greater comfort and energy efficiency;
• Establish dynamics of participation in the life of protected areas, facilitating their visits by citizens, namely through the elimination of excessive and disproportionate restrictions that make it difficult, medium and long-term stay programs, visits by students and senior citizens, “experiences” of internalizing the value of fauna and flora and providing new means of promoting natural parks;
• Improve communication and management systems for natural values, namely through small investments in properties, overnight stays, support infrastructures, wildlife observation spaces, circuits and leisure equipment intended for visitors to protected areas, designated -mind of natural parks, with a view to promoting environmental values ​​and the comfort and quality of the visit;
• Provide more and better information, in several languages, about the natural heritage of protected areas,
as well as the coverage of mobile data networks, allowing the progressive replacement of information on physical media with digital information;
• Promote biodiversity conservation initiatives in an urban context, in conjunction with municipalities, disseminating leisure and public enjoyment spaces,
recovering riverside areas
and creating new green areas with specific functions, which simultaneously contribute to air quality and carbon sequestration;
• Assign the responsibility for defining and protecting the respective Metropolitan Ecological Structures to the Metropolitan Authorities of Lisbon and Porto;
• Position Portugal at the forefront of the economic valorization of biodiversity and ecosystem services, viewing them as strategic assets essential for territorial, social and intergenerational cohesion.
Biological diversity will be treated and quantified as “natural capital”, for the assessment of which specific methodologies will be instituted, in line with the MAES (Mapping and Assessment of Ecosystems and their Services) approach resulting from the EU biodiversity strategy for 2020 ;
• Integrate the state of conservation and the value of services provided by ecosystems in the State of the Environment Report, as well as in public accounts, through the promotion of INE's satellite environment account.
Guarantee access and quality of public water, sanitation and waste services
Access to drinking water and basic sanitation, as well as the collection and treatment of waste, constitute basic needs of the first order, in some cases already recognized internationally as human rights,
whose implementation is important to guarantee, not only in terms of universal availability, economic accessibility, quality of service and environmental integrity, but also financial sustainability.
In this sector, however, there is an accumulation of erratic decisions, deficient contracts and bad management practices that need to be corrected, for the benefit of citizens.
As such, the PS will: Stop the EGF privatization process, based on its illegality and as long as this does not imply the payment of compensation to the competitor chosen by the PSD/CDS government,
in order to reverse the excessive concentration and strong distortion of competition existing in the waste sector;
• Promote the resizing and restructuring of the Águas de Portugal Group, in dialogue with the municipalities, from a zero base, that is, regardless of the territorial organization model proposed by the PSD/CDS government, whose rationality and effectiveness are highly questionable;
• Integrate the urban water cycle, in the sense of a link between water supply and basic sanitation, the trend and progressive verticalization of upward and downward systems and the aggregation of municipal systems, reinforcing its business and integrating competencies, such as sharing structures, allowing greater rationalization in the allocation of resources;
• Define a program for using recycled water, which closes the water cycle, integrating local authorities in the process;
• Renegotiate, together with local authorities, the first generation concession contracts signed over the last decades, up and down, whose performance leaves a lot to be desired in terms of the level of service provided
and which, paradoxically, provide concessionaires with absolutely disproportionate and unacceptable rates of profitability in light of the rules of a healthy market, with high financial burdens on citizens;
• Define equal principles at national level for the promotion of a social water tariff, particularly taking into account households with lower incomes and large families;
• Set up and make effective a guarantee of minimum services, considered essential to the dignity of the human person, in relation to access to certain basic services or services of general interest, such as water, sanitation, waste collection, among others;
• Develop Portuguese-Spanish cooperation in the water sector, namely through strengthening the actions and measures provided for in the Albufeira Convention, aiming, among other purposes, at implementing joint management plans for shared river basins;
• Promote the use of biological waste from cities, resulting from the cleaning of public and private gardens, in the creation of planting areas with high potential for carbon sequestration, in central urban areas;
• Value and encourage the composting of organic waste;
• Promote waste reduction as an active priority in the 3R's policy, namely penalizing the use of packaging, within the scope of the mechanisms in force.
SIMPLEX of the Environment.
It is imperative to speed up and simplify the articulation between the environmental impact assessment regime and other sectoral legal regimes for prior administrative control of polluting activities, eliminating disproportionate bureaucratic burdens.
The single environmental licensing (LUA), approved by the PSD/CDS government, actually falls far short of what was expected and necessary, limiting itself to creating an electronic title that brings together all the assessments, simplifying or even shortening the respective assessments. deadlines.
Therefore, the PS proposes to go further, namely: Proceed with the effective consolidation of the multiple administrative procedures for prior administrative control in environmental matters;
• Establish zero industrial licensing, for those installations that already meet all the necessary environmental and health authorizations;
• Eliminate excessive bureaucratic demands and burdens in environmental matters, as well as disproportionate context costs.
Ensure greater effectiveness of environmental policy
In order to achieve, across the board, greater effectiveness of environmental policy and the effective realization of ecological benefits, the PS will:
• Create an “Environmental Superfund”, concentrating the different environmental funds that currently exist (namely the Portuguese Carbon Fund, the Environmental Intervention Fund, the Water Resources Protection Fund, the Fund for the Conservation of Nature and Biodiversity and , eventually, the Energy Efficiency Fund), in order to obtain an instrument with greater financial capacity to act in the preservation of natural resources, in the prevention of risks and in the repair of ecological damage;
• Gather, integrate and systematically make available information about the environment and the use of natural resources, integrating it with management and monitoring instruments for the use of the territory and with the obligations to communicate information to international institutions;
• Disseminate good practices in green public procurement;
• Internalize the costs associated with the use and degradation of natural resources, namely by providing payment mechanisms for environmental services (PSA),
defining an environmental compensation regime
and regulating mandatory civil liability insurance for damage to the environment;
• Reduce the use of fossil fuels and air pollution by promoting neighborhoods with mixed uses (housing, commerce, work, school and leisure), reducing daily travel
and creating solid roots in the lives of citizens, through the sharing and local production of goods and services;
• Launch a national program to recover environmental liabilities and treat contaminated soils (brownfields);
• Launch a program to revitalize Portuguese rivers.
This program must, on the one hand, restore the quality of river waters and enhance their landscape dimension
and, on the other hand, make these areas a qualified and attractive leisure space for people and tourism, thus promoting the uniqueness of the ecosystems and the socioeconomic relevance of the main water courses;
• Develop an education policy for sustainability and awareness raising for the adoption of environmentally appropriate practices.
11. VALUE AGRICULTURAL AND FORESTRY ACTIVITY AND RURAL SPACE
With regard to agricultural activity and the rural world, the PS program is based on three main axes: the exploration of the economic potential of agriculture,
promoting rural development
and the promotion of sustainable forest management.
These three axes follow the same general philosophy: effectiveness in terms of results, efficiency in terms of costs
and equity in terms of positive discrimination for disadvantaged areas, small-scale farming or young farmers.
Regarding the economic valorization of agricultural and forestry activities and their channeling to the market, the fundamental guidelines are aimed at improving the quality of products
ensuring food security and increasing the productivity of production factors,
with a view to the internationalization of the agri-food and agro-forestry sectors
and import substitution in the national market.
A specific macro-objective, which well summarizes the basic orientation of this axis, is the achievement of balance in the agricultural trade balance within the horizon of two legislatures.
Regarding the promotion of rural development and territorial cohesion, the fundamental guidelines focus on reinforced support for small-scale agriculture,
to the rejuvenation of the social fabric of rural areas, with emphasis on agricultural and rural business,
and the promotion and reinforcement of local strategies and partnerships.
In this way, the aim is to stimulate the diversification of the economic base and the creation of jobs in rural areas,
the valorization of traditional products
and the production of leisure and recreational amenities and environmental services.
Such plans presuppose a multi-fund management framework, involving municipalities, local development associations and the deconcentrated administration of the State.
Finally, regarding the valorization of forest resources, the fundamental guidelines include: strengthening forestry planning and the productivity of the main forestry-industrial sectors,
support for the improvement of producer organizations and interprofessional management, as well as the primacy of forest protection against fires and harmful biotic agents,
the environmental and economic dynamization of forest areas under State management,
the stimulus for the certification of production processes
and the promotion of multiple-use forests (namely agroforestry systems and mountain forests).
CAP payments on time, reducing returns to a minimum
The PS will ensure that farmers receive CAP Pillar I payments within the shortest timetables allowed by community regulations and that CAP II Pillar beneficiaries see their projects approved and payments processed on a regular basis.
Furthermore, it is important to minimize the return to Brussels of support granted under the CAP.
In order to achieve these objectives, the PS will introduce new management methods that will allow:• Processing around €600M in annual payments to around 200,000 beneficiaries of the I Pillar of the CAP, respecting the legally established deadlines;
• Observe a regular and rapid cadence in decision-making and payment of financial support within the scope of the Rural Development Program (PDR), as well as the respective national financial contribution of around 120 million euros/year;
• Guarantee the effectiveness of controls on community support, aiming to reduce financial returns to Brussels to a minimum.
It involves adopting procedures and managing existing human and material resources to ensure the timely and effective implementation of mandatory controls on CAP beneficiaries, with the aim of reducing the amount of returns by 80% during the legislative period.
Increase support for small and young farmersIn order to further support small and young farmers, the PS will:
• Increase the minimum payment per farmer from €500 to €600, within the scope of the Small Agriculture Regime of the I Pillar of the CAP.
This is a voluntary measure, with around 80,000 farmers being able to opt for this scheme;
• Increase payments per hectare by 50%, for the first 5 ha, under the 1st Pillar of the CAP.
With this measure, all farmers entitled to receive direct payments will see the amounts for the first 5 ha increased by 50%, an amount compensated with a degressive reduction of the following;
• Increase the maximum eligible amount of investment projects for small farmers from €25,000 to €40,000.
In this way, it is expected to benefit a potential universe of 80,000 beneficiaries;
• Raise the minimum premium for the first installation for young farmers from €15,000 to €20,000.
This measure is expected to install around 10,000 new young farmers during the legislature;
• Introduce reductions in direct payments from the I pillar of the CAP to beneficiaries who receive more than €300,000/year, including the possibility of establishing “maximum ceilings”, with savings generated in this way being used to reinforce support measures for small and to young farmers;
• Increase support for investment or subsidize interest rates in operations that aim to increase the economic size of producer organizations, that incorporate innovative technologies or that contribute to energy efficiency.
This measure will have positive effects on producers' income and an increase in production and exports.
Encourage rural entrepreneurship
Agriculture and, in general, the rural world must be a universe of entrepreneurs.
To this end, it is important to reformulate current financial instruments,
facilitate access to production factors as essential as land,
encourage forms of organization, such as cooperatives,
and provide professional marketing mechanisms, whether in local distribution or in the internationalization of agricultural and regional products.
With these objectives, the PS will: Create the Young Rural Entrepreneur Statute and define incentives, in a multi-fund approach, in order to contribute to the diversification of the regional economic base, the retention of young people in the rural world and the creation of jobs.
This measure aims to install young entrepreneurs in non-agricultural activities in the rural world, in accordance with the financial allocations that the Regional Operational Programs allocate to the measure;
• Reformulate the typology and resources allocated to the financial instruments provided for in the PDR 2020, considering the use of mutual guarantee and risk capital instruments, with the aim of leveraging investment and stimulating rural entrepreneurship;
• Create, in addition to the Land Exchange, a Land Bank (BT), based on all available State land assets, to give priority to young farmers and refugees with adequate training.
This measure aims to size economically viable farms, lease them and sell them after a minimum period of proven good management;
• Create a Land Mobilization Fund (FMT), made up of revenues from the rental and sale of the Land Bank’s assets, to carry out new acquisitions of rustic buildings with a view to the successive renovation of the Land Bank’s assets. Land Bank;
• Create legal intervention mechanisms, aiming to take advantage of abandoned agricultural and forestry land or those of unknown owners;
• Stimulate and support cooperative initiatives in agriculture, forestry and other sectors in rural areas, as well as their respective activities;
• Encourage the creation of short circuits for the marketing of fresh and processed agricultural products,
aiming to sell local production at fair prices, with benefits for producers, consumers and the environment;
• Define a National Strategy for Organic Agriculture and implement an Action Plan for the production and promotion of organic products;
• Create a framework of incentives for the internationalization of companies in the agricultural and forestry sectors, around a national strategy that leverages all available support instruments (essentially of community origin).
Expand and make irrigation more attractive
With a view to increasing irrigated agricultural production and promoting its competitiveness, the PS:
• It will define a National Irrigation Plan, aiming to rehabilitate degraded irrigation perimeters and take advantage of new areas with greater potential for irrigation, including the expansion of the Alqueva project.
It involves inventorying and establishing priorities for irrigation works across the country, according to the financial means available in the Rural Development Program (PDR 2020).
Through this measure, it is intended to recover and install around 60,000 hectares of irrigated land;
• Approve the New Water Price Calculation System for Irrigation, in order to guarantee the competitiveness of irrigated crops, with lower costs for users and an effective penalty for absenteeism, by increasing the fixed component of the rate watering.
The objective is to increase the rate of use of irrigation perimeters by 25% and the consequent increase in production.
Monitoring and possible extraordinary support for the milk sector
The PS will create the Sub-Thematic Program for the Milk Sector, within the framework of the II Pillar of the CAP, if persistent negative impacts are confirmed, resulting from the end of the milk quota regime that occurred in March 2015.
It involves using the room for maneuver granted by Community regulations to respond to specific problems.
If activated, this measure will affect around 4,000 milk producers.
Guarantee animal health
Despite large investments over the years, several animal diseases, particularly those of sheep and cattle, which are subject to eradication plans, have yet to be eradicated.
There also remain problems with financing the entities responsible for implementing them, which justify the need to readapt these plans.
On the other hand, it is important to make the national slaughter network profitable, increasing the profits of this industry, while better guaranteeing public health. Thus, the PS will:
• Establish new working and supervision methods that can lead to the complete eradication or, at least, a minimum incidence of brucellosis and tuberculosis in ruminants;
• Readjust animal health programs and the respective supervision systems, as well as guarantee the regularity of payments due to Livestock Producer Organizations;
• Ensure the uninterrupted functioning of veterinary inspection in slaughterhouses, creating a pool of veterinarians who will be in charge of carrying out health inspections during weekends and holidays in slaughterhouses, thus allowing their operation uninterrupted and increasing its competitiveness.
Promote forestry sector reform
The forest plays a very important role in creating jobs and in the economic development of the country, which is why it is important to carry out a structural reform of the forestry sector
and create conditions to promote professional and sustainable forest management,
boosting the increase in productivity and profitability of forestry assets,
based on better planning of forest areas.
From this perspective, the PS is committed to increasing the areas under active and certified forest management, and improving the functioning of the ZIF, whose results are still below the objectives that led to their creation.
To this end, the PS will: Support the forestry association movement
and revitalize the Forest Intervention Zones (ZIF), giving them priority in the granting of public support;
• Encourage the development of other forest exploitation models, such as Forest Management Companies (SGF) and Forest Real Estate Investment Funds (FIIF);
• Improve wasteland forest management with the adoption of new flexible models, aiming to increase stakeholder participation in respecting the social, economic and environmental values ​​of wasteland units;
• Transform national forests into reference areas, safeguarding natural values ​​and maximizing the value obtained from their active management;
• Support the development of the forestry sector, through the creation of incentives for the certification of forestry management, with a view to increasing the profitability of forestry owners
and ensure the sustainability of the supply of national raw materials to the forest-based industry;
• Promote, in conjunction with Single Property Information, the progressive development of the Rural Property Registry, particularly in the territories under ZIF management. Protect forest resources
Mitigating forest fires and the incidence of pests and diseases constitutes a priority national aim for the sustainability of the Portuguese forest and for confidence in investment in the forest.
• Therefore, the PS will: Review and improve the Forestry Sappers program, namely through the respective professional training;
• Create a National Controlled Fire Program;
• Review the Forest Health Operational Program and create operational subprograms for the control and eradication of the main forest pests and diseases.
Value forestry assets
The national forest sector must constitute a lever for the country’s economic development strategy.
From this perspective, the PS is committed to: Supporting the forestry association movement;
• Develop forestry sector ranks
and increase the profitability of forest owners;
• Encourage certification of sustainable forest management
and the creation of new business areas in the forestry market;
• Support applied research to increase productivity and new forestry models.
Develop multiple use of the forest
The multiple use of forest resources must be a strategic objective for the development of the forestry sector and the generation of wealth in the interior of the country.
To this end, the PS will: Increase the contribution of fishing, forestry, beekeeping, the production of mushrooms and dried fruits and other non-wood products such as resin;
• Encourage uses related to recreation and tourism in forest areas (e.g. nature, hunting and sports tourism);•
Promote the orderly management of hunting resources;
• Value the forestry-environmental services provided by forest areas (e.g. biodiversity, soil and water conservation, carbon sequestration);
• Support the installation of multiple-use forestry systems.
C. PRIORITY TO INNOVATION
Portugal must aim for a prosperous future and this will only be possible by stimulating, in all areas, creativity and innovation, which allow us to successfully respond to social, economic and environmental challenges, expand horizons and place us in a vanguard position. O
The PS therefore recognizes the importance of differentiation, renewal and permanent updating of ways of doing and creating,
the relevance of modernization and the introduction of new and better practices, both for economic progress and scientific advancement, but also for cultural enjoyment or to overcome, in a sustainable way, the energy challenge.
Doing differently, doing better, with an eye on the future and economic and social development, implies giving a strong priority to innovation in the design of public policies.
Transversely, an attitude open to modernity and available for innovation should infect and mobilize the entire society.
When it comes to energy, we should not aspire less than the front group, leading the ongoing transition process.
A transition from fossil fuels to new forms of energy production and consumption, in preparation for a future without carbon emissions.
If we take advantage of the endogenous potential of renewable energy sources, if we adopt demanding energy efficiency standards, if we promote sustainable mobility and if we invest, from now on, on clean technologies that allow all of this, we will certainly be in better conditions to compete in the global market of tomorrow.
Cultural policies are equally critical to the challenge of innovation.
The State is not responsible for being a creator itself but for providing and guaranteeing the conditions for creativity to occur, so that the structures that welcome and disseminate it fulfill their role, stimulating curiosity and promoting citizenship.
Investing in Culture therefore means investing in a society with high qualifications where creativity flourishes, which generates innovative works and activities, which establishes and renews demanding quality standards, vital conditions for competitiveness in the current era.
A culturally enriched and participatory population is also a field for recruiting qualified work and entrepreneurship, an engaging means of cultural valorization of productive activities, a reference market for quality goods and services.
The future of Portugal is also built with more knowledge and more scientific culture.
Greater democratization in access to knowledge means even more equal opportunities, more social mobility
and a new stimulus to innovate and undertake in Portugal.
It is, therefore, essential to take advantage of the human capital in which the country has already invested and the heritage of scientific knowledge built over the last few decades.
In this sense, the PS will resume the valorization of scientific and technological knowledge,
returning confidence to scientific and higher education institutions,
recovering our scientists and researchers for the production of knowledge in Portugal.
Finally, the regeneration of the national economy and the resumption of a trajectory of lasting growth depends heavily on the country's ability to explore its innovation potential, mobilizing not only economic agents, but also knowledge production centers and all sectors that can contribute to enhancing synergies, better use of resources and the deepening of competitive advantages.
This strategy proves to be decisive in increasing the global productivity of the economy,
increase the weight of emerging and innovative sectors,
and encourage the creation of companies with the capacity to internationalize, with a positive impact on employment and the trade balance.
Only in this way, through an outward-looking economic development model based on the quality and differentiation of supply, and not on low wages, will it be possible to improve the living conditions of the Portuguese.
12. LEADING THE ENERGY TRANSITION
The Portuguese economy must grow again.
But it must do so following a sustainability model.
This implies adopting an integrated view of environmental issues,
the energy challenge
and the commitment to efficient mobility, always with a strong touch of innovation.
All these factors must be worked together and converge towards sustainable development, which promotes civilizational progress, technological advancement and economic prosperity without destroying natural resources.
We already have a huge potential for producing clean energy, from renewable resources, which are largely yet to be explored: the country is rich in sun, wind and water.
Of course, when taking advantage of these resources, we must not ignore the respective economic costs or implications on the price of energy.
But, contrary to what some claim, it is possible to take advantage of our renewable potential without harming the financial sustainability of the energy system, nor the competitiveness of the economy, especially if we start to see green energy as an export product.
With the additional benefit, also economic, of reducing our extremely high dependence on energy from abroad (which exceeds 70%) and, in this way, reducing external debt.
Equally decisive, in reducing economic costs, is a serious and consistent commitment to energy efficiency.
The cheapest energy is the one that is saved.
We must therefore be able to reduce the weight of final energy consumption in GDP,
promoting greater efficiency in Public Administration, companies and the individual behaviors of citizens.
Efficiency in the use of resources also depends on the way we move.
Especially in cities, it is necessary, on the one hand, to encourage the sharing of means of transport
and the use of less polluting vehicles (such as electric vehicles)
and, on the other hand, make public transport more attractive, favoring intermodality and, whenever possible, complementarity with soft means of transport (such as cycling).
In this way, it will be possible to reduce urban congestion and achieve more efficient mobility, providing greater comfort, speed and quality of life with lower energy consumption.
In short, sustainable mobility.
By all these means, together, we will move towards a low-carbon economy.
But that doesn't make the economy any less vibrant: leading the energy transition means creating more qualified jobs,
produce more technological know-how,
generate more value-added exports, effectively realizing the long-awaited goal of “green growth”.
Affirm Portugal as an energy supplier to Europe
In order to fully exploit its potential for producing renewable energy, particularly from solar sources, Portugal must start to see this energy as a tradable good, in an export logic.
This can occur, to a certain extent, through statistical transfers, but, after a certain scale, it will be necessary to reinforce electrical interconnections with Europe.
In this way, we will be able to capitalize on the fact that we have the highest number of hours of solar exposure in the EU, establishing ourselves as a supplier of clean energy for the entire European economic area.
On the other hand, given the recent geopolitical instability surrounding the Ukrainian conflict, the Sines LNG terminal could function as a gateway for natural gas to the center of Europe, thus constituting a relevant alternative to supplies from Russia. .
To this end, it will also be necessary to invest in gas pipelines connecting Spain and the center of Europe.
In this context, the PS will: Give priority, in European negotiations, to the implementation of the Energy Union, in particular the development of European energy networks and the strengthening of interconnections, particularly between the Iberian Peninsula and the rest of Europe;
• Ensure that the corridors defined for trans-European electrical connections allow the flow of solar energy produced in the national territory to Europe;
• Within the scope of the set of projects included in the Connecting European Facility (CEF) program, promote the interconnection of the natural gas network in both directions with Spain and develop an Iberian connection network to LNG receiving ports, namely Sines, and the main consumption centers;
• Insist on the implementation of natural gas corridors to connect with Europe beyond the Pyrenees, in order to reduce dependence on energy resources from the east to around 20% of its current natural gas imports.
Resuming investment in renewable energy
The EU recently set the objective of achieving a 27% share of renewable sources in final energy consumption by 2030.
But Portugal, given its natural conditions, can and should be at the forefront of this movement, assuming more ambitious goals, aiming to achieve a minimum of 40% renewable energy by 2030.
To achieve this goal, the PS will: Complete the National Plan for Dams with High Hydroelectric Potential (PNBEPH) and encourage the development of mini-hydro plants (with little environmental impact and plenty of potential to, in a disseminated way throughout the territory, revitalize the construction sector), preferably equipped with reversible pump systems (for energy storage);
• Take advantage of the fact that Portugal has the EU territory with the greatest number of hours of sun exposure and plenty of wind, attracting solar and/or wind power plant projects whose share of renewables is intended exclusively for other Member States (namely by strengthening interconnections);
• Launch, in partnership between the State and local authorities, a micro-generation program in public establishments (schools, health centers, sports facilities, barracks, police stations, markets, etc.), particularly from the solar energy.
The initial investment will, to a large extent, be borne by energy services companies (ESE), which will be remunerated over several years, depending on the revenue obtained from the sale of the electricity produced.
Dedicated credit lines will be negotiated with the bank, with special conditions, which the ESEs can use to finance the installation of micro-generation equipment;
• Promote the decentralized production of renewable energy, without the need for subsidies, whether for self-consumption or for sale to the grid at market prices.
In order to make this option more attractive, but still at no cost to the system, the possibility will be admitted that, in the self-consumption regime, the excess energy injected into the network will compensate for electricity consumption during off-peak hours;
• Promote the virtual aggregation (pooling) of energy producers-consumers, in relation to dedicated mini-electricity generation plants from renewable sources, without any tariff subsidy and, therefore, without burdening the electrical system;
• Encourage the installation of solar panels for water heating (solar thermal);
• Encourage the use of forest biomass, particularly from waste, cleaning or thinning, not only to diversify energy sources,
but also as a way of contributing to the sustainability of the Portuguese forest and the prevention of fires;
• Evaluate and test the potential for renewable energy production (namely wind) in offshore areas.
Cleaner and cheaper energy
Contrary to the frequently promoted idea, clean energy (produced from renewable sources) is not necessarily synonymous with more expensive tariffs.
Just think that a considerable part of the General Economic Interest Costs (CIEG), which increase the electricity tariff, is not related to the production of electricity from renewable sources.
Furthermore, the PSD-CDS government's policy, clearly hostile to renewable energy, did not lead to a reduction in the price of electricity, nor to a reduction in the tariff deficit.
On the contrary, despite the austerity and cost-cutting rhetoric, the tariff deficit has increased over the last four years, now exceeding €5,000 million.
The PS will demonstrate that it is possible to take advantage of the enormous endogenous potential for renewable energy production without increasing the tariffs paid by consumers and, in addition, progressively reducing the tariff deficit.
To this end, it will be necessary to: Contain the costs arising from the tariff deficit, bringing them closer to the real costs of financing in the financial markets;
• Take advantage of the end of the CMEC (Contractual Balance Maintenance Costs) review regime, in 2017, to increase the share of renewables without running the risk of this implying an increase in compensation to be paid to already installed producers;
• Associate the planned closure of the Sines thermoelectric plant, also scheduled for 2017, with a very significant reduction in the cost of electricity production.
The same procedure must be adopted, in due time, for the Pego and Turbogás plants;
• Limit the remuneration for hydroelectric energy in drought years, similar to what was done in Spain;
• Renegotiate concessions in the energy sector, in order to ensure an equitable sharing, between the State (grantor) and private concessionaires, of the gains obtained in the meantime;
• Ensure a gradual and progressive transition from the current tariff subsidy model (feed-in) to a remuneration system for renewable energy at market prices, possibly accompanied by a transaction mechanism for green certificates (which represent the value of the environmental component of renewable electricity);
• Reconfigure the regime applicable to the social electricity tariff, facilitating access and increasing the number of beneficiaries of this tariff, in order to cover the universe of families originally estimated but never reached.
Thus reconfigured, the social tariff will provide an effective benefit and a refuge solution for many domestic consumers (and, eventually, SMEs) in difficulties.
Stimulate energy competition and competitiveness
The energy sector has been chronically averse to competition.
It is true that, over the last few years, there have been successive waves of liberalization of this economic sector, but these have never fully produced the expected effects.
This is clearly demonstrated by the fact that the energy market continues to be dominated by a small number of large companies, generally historic operators (or incumbents).
It is therefore urgent to counteract this state of affairs, introducing greater competition in this market, to the benefit of consumers, companies and, in general, the competitiveness of the Portuguese economy.
With this objective, the PS will: Stimulate greater competition in the commercialization of electricity and gas, namely by encouraging the emergence of new economic agents and differentiated, innovative commercial offers adjusted to different types of consumption;
• Increase, from the perspective of the domestic consumer, the perceptibility and comparability of tariffs, consumption and energy billings;
• Regularly organize electrical power auctions or other measures with equivalent effect that encourage the emergence of virtual suppliers, expanding consumers' range of options;
• Promote the development of smart electrical networks (smart grids)
and ensure, gradually and progressively, the installation of smart meters that allow for more rational and efficient management of energy consumption,
greater cost comparability, as well as the possibility of defining more flexible and customized tariffs by electricity suppliers;
• Create an Iberian wholesale natural gas market (MIB-GAS);
• Allow natural gas consumers who so wish, especially industrial consumers, to dissociate the moment of purchase from the moment of consumption, as well as change the delivery point of their supply contracts to the virtual exchange point ( VTP), thus being able to contract directly or with another supplier the use of the infrastructure from that point to its place of consumption;
• Promote the unbundling of energy markets, deepening the solutions already adopted in the electricity and gas sectors and extending the same logic to the fuels sector, particularly with regard to storage and logistics.
Boost to energy efficiency
We must make our economy much more efficient from an energy point of view, with obvious advantages for companies and citizens.
But, first of all, it must be the State itself – responsible for high energy waste, with harmful consequences not only for the environment, but also in terms of public expenditure – to set an example, implementing active energy efficiency measures, with the objective of, by the end of the legislature, reducing electricity (and fuel) consumption in activities carried out in each ministry by 30%, namely those associated with buildings, fleets and intermediate consumption.
Furthermore, public lighting alone is responsible for 3% of total energy consumption and around 24% of energy consumption in the public sector, which represents a high cost, especially for municipalities.
Since lighting also represents a considerable part of citizens' energy bills, it must become much more efficient.
Likewise, there is a large margin of savings in domestic energy consumption, depending on the type of appliances and other electronic equipment we use at home, and fuel consumption.
Therefore, to achieve a more energy efficient paradigm, PS will adopt the following initiatives:
• Define objectives, methodologies and ways to reward efficiency gains in energy-intense installations (such as factories, warehouses, large commercial areas, hospitals, hotels, etc.);
• Promote fuel switching initiatives, particularly by companies producing tradable goods, thus generating energy savings
and increasing their competitiveness;
• Raise the building's energy efficiency parameters, through investment in urban rehabilitation, with concerns regarding the choice of materials used, the thermal and insulation solutions adopted and the installation of energy saving and/or efficient production equipment; •
Adopt, in conjunction with municipalities, a set of actions specifically aimed at promoting energy efficiency in the transport sector;
• Promote the conversion of vehicles and fleets, so that they start using natural gas as fuel, with a lower carbon intensity, particularly through flexfuel solutions for heavy vehicles;
• Establish, in the Central State Administration, a prioritization and a detailed calendar of energy efficiency actions – at the level of buildings, fleets and public purchases – broken down at the level of each ministry;
• Establish mandatory targets for replacing interior lighting in Public Administration with more efficient solutions (LED, for example)
• Recover, amplify and, above all, streamline the Energy Efficiency Program in Public Administration – ECO.AP.
This program must be simplified and begin to incorporate other reduction and savings potentials associated with fuel consumption, electricity consumption, water consumption, paper consumption and waste produced;
• Dedicate a financial envelope of €5 million/year to the launch of an annual energy efficiency competition, in which both administrative entities themselves and energy service companies (ESE) will be invited to present energy efficiency projects in the Public administration;
• Integrate the management of the State's transport fleets, from the point of view of reducing consumption and adopting efficiency strategies;
• Exploit the potential of kinetic energy from traffic and heavy transport infrastructures, as well as energy obtained from water transport networks or ventilation and cooling systems existing in large urban infrastructures;
• Establish a partnership with municipalities to reconvert public lighting, namely by replacing current systems with more efficient solutions (LED, for example).
The execution of this program will be associated with the expiration of the current municipal concessions for the distribution of low voltage electrical energy and their renewal through mandatory competitive procedures, through public tenders on a municipal or intermunicipal scale, in which the adoption of more efficient power solutions public lighting will serve as a criterion for choosing new concessionaires;
• Launch a vast lamp replacement program in the residential and service sectors, based on the model and expanding the scope of application of some projects supported by the Consumption Efficiency Promotion Plan (PPEC), under the responsibility of ERSE;
• Impose a tax that discourages the purchase of household appliances or other electronic equipment with an energy rating equal to or lower than B;
• Employ alternative financing strategies for active energy efficiency measures, namely through contracting with ESE, which design, finance and execute projects to reduce energy consumption, being remunerated by the value of the savings thus obtained;.
Promote quality public transport
One of the main problems in cities, with harmful effects in terms of the environment and quality of life, is the intensive use of individual transport for commuting.
In order to reverse this scenario, it is necessary to provide citizens with quality public transport services that are comfortable, fast, integrated, easily accessible and intelligible (in terms of routes, timetables, costs, etc.) for the user.
On the other hand, through more inclusive mobility, the aim is to promote social cohesion, maximizing accessibility for all citizens, without exception,
thus reducing inequalities in opportunities in work, education and access to culture. To achieve these objectives, the PS will:
• Promote the operation of quality public transport services (collective and individual, with or without a driver), with timetables and frequencies adjusted to user needs;
• Encourage the creation of intermodal hub stations that facilitate the connection of different modes of transport and mobility services, and that are in themselves centralities that contribute to local development;
• Encourage modal integration in terms of ticketing, tariffs, routes and timetables and cost management by the user, increasing the convenience of travel using different modes of transport, including not only heavy public transport but also soft mobility systems (sharing, pedestrian, bicycle, tram, elevators);
• Encourage the development of digital platforms that simplify and integrate all user information on a common and accessible basis on a mobile phone, particularly with regard to route simulation, real-time schedules and the effective cost of the trip.
Likewise, efforts will be made to encourage the dematerialization of ticketing systems;
• Promote the development of a universal and integrated mobility payment system (Mobility Card), through which citizens can access all public transport services, parking, tolls, vehicle rental in shared systems or vehicle charging electrical;
• Create a “family pass” for urban public transport, as well as group tickets (for 5 or more people);
• Strengthen and standardize discounts on public transport for students up to 25 years of age;
• Contribute to the development of social responsibility policies by large employers and demand generators, which encourage the adoption and promotion of public transport solutions whenever they are efficient;
• Promote trial periods of the public transport system for people who usually opt for cars for their commutes.
Implement new mobility concepts
Along with public transport, it is important to consider, nowadays, other concepts and formats of urban mobility, which allow reducing the pressure on road traffic, combating pollution, providing greater speed and flexibility of travel.
and, simultaneously, promoting the well-being and quality of life of populations.
In this area, the PS will: Encourage soft modes of transport, such as cycling and walking;
• Promote smooth mobility not only within each municipality, but also at an inter-municipal level, reducing the distance between the city and suburbs through the sharing of soft mobility infrastructures and the creation of connecting green areas;
• Promote the construction of cycling infrastructure, taking into account 3 user profiles and 3 different functions: sports, tourism and leisure and urban mobility;
Allow the transport of bicycles on public transport (namely on the train and metro);
Reduce the area occupied by individual transport, on roads and in parking, favoring the use of public transport and smooth mobility, especially pedestrian and cycling mobility, as a way of promoting youth mobility and accessibility for senior citizens;
Encourage operators of car sharing and bike sharing services;
• Encourage the implementation of Bus Rapid Transit services, which combine the capacity and speed of light rail at a much lower cost;•
Promote flexible and on-demand transport services, whenever appropriate, particularly in regions and times of low demand.
Boost and expand electric mobility
Due to pure political prejudice, the PSD/CDS government completely blocked the electric mobility project, thus making it impossible to form an industrial cluster in our country around this technology.
It is now important to resume the aim of electric mobility, vital to progressively replace the dependence on fossil fuels in road transport, with the inherent GHG emissions, with greater consumption of renewable electricity.
To this end, the PS will: Direct incentives for the acquisition of electric vehicles to segments with the greatest energy and environmental impact, such as public transport service buses, taxis, school transport, freight transport and urban logistics;
Create incentives for the emergence of electric car sharing and bike sharing operators;
Commit the State and local authorities to the acquisition of 25% of electric vehicles when renewing their fleet intended for city circulation;
Create incentives that lead logistics operators to adopt emission-free electric vehicles, particularly when operating in urban areas and in lastmile transport;
Rehabilitate and resize the Mo-bi.E public charging network;
Promote charging in home and business garages, where electric vehicle users park most of the time;
Define a sales tariff for the energy stored in a decentralized manner in the batteries of electric vehicles back to the electricity grid.
In this way, electric vehicles can function as a stabilizer for the electrical grid, storing energy during off-peak periods (when energy is available at a lower cost) and returning it to the electrical grid at peak times (when the electrical system needs more energy to make available at a higher cost).
Develop the energy technology cluster
The next government must ensure the maintenance of the wind cluster created in our country and encourage the emergence of an equivalent cluster around photovoltaic energy.
In addition, electric mobility represents a unique opportunity to develop a new technological and industrial cluster – covering charging points, management of intelligent charging networks, as well as batteries and other components for the electric vehicle industry – that we cannot waste.
Therefore, the PS will design, within the scope of Portugal 2020, programs and lines of support to stimulate:
Applied scientific research into clean technologies and new methods of producing electricity from renewable sources;
Coordination between industry and R&D institutions for the production of energy storage solutions;
The industry of components for electric vehicles, electric motors and batteries, as well as charging infrastructure;
The upgrade of the production and assembly industry of two-wheeled vehicles – motorcycles, scooters and bicycles – to the electric segment;
The training of technicians for the manufacturing and repair industries of electric vehicles and their components;
The creation of living laboratories to demonstrate new solutions in electric mobility: at the vehicle level, with emphasis on new applications of electric mobility, such as public transport, freight transport or urban logistics;
and smart charging, integrated with smart grids and decentralized renewable energy generation, with emphasis on V2G (vehicle to grid) and V2H (vehicle to home).
13. INVEST IN CULTURE, DEMOCRATIZE ACCESS
The public cultural sector has suffered devastating combined effects in recent years.
The result of the PSD-CDS government is marked by politically irrelevant supervision, emptied of powers and incapable of ensuring a coherent internal policy or effective interdepartmental articulation with the remaining areas of governance.
These negative results were further amplified by dramatic underbudgeting, a hasty policy of institutional mergers that led to the disintegration of organizations, a blind reduction in staff and a general absence of a medium and long-term strategy.
The economic crisis worsened this reality, which resulted in a waste of the enormous creative, social and economic potential that this sector represents for the country.
The PS sees Culture as an essential pillar of Democracy, national identity, innovation and sustained development.
Guaranteeing the constitutional imperative of democratic access to cultural creation and enjoyment
, the preservation, expansion and dissemination of our material and immaterial heritage
and the assumption of Culture as an essential factor of innovation, qualification and competitiveness of our economy are fundamental aspects of the PS government's action.
The PS will therefore promote a transversal cultural policy, identifying, stimulating and articulating cultural components in all areas of governance, in particular those of education, training, employment, regional development, tourism and foreign trade
, of which the launch of an investment program for the recovery of historical heritage that will mobilize several of these areas will be a paradigmatic example.
In the specific field of the public sector of Culture, the PS's priorities are: restructuring the sector, providing it with flexible and effective organic models suited to the specificity of its mission;
de-concentrate heritage protection and creation support responsibilities;
encourage networking between Central and Local Administration and between public agents and civil society;
and redefine the rules and procedures for granting support.
To this end, active and consistent protection will be reestablished that can assert itself as a partner and promoter of this collective effort and as a credible interlocutor for producers and creators.
This political priority implies a commitment to progressive consolidation, throughout the legislature, of the budgetary resources allocated to the Culture sector,
but also the implementation of integrated management mechanisms for financial resources from other government areas with an impact on the sector
and optimizing the use of community funds available for this purpose.
It is also necessary to reinforce the arts and humanities as core components of the entire educational system,
the affirmation of the public media service as a privileged instrument of cultural policy,
as well as the expanded use of new information technologies that enhance expanded access to heritage and creation.
The PS is also committed to pursuing measures that, in terms of taxation, labor legislation and Social Security, dignify cultural professionals,
support and boost entrepreneurship and creative industries
stimulate the production and consumption of cultural goods.
Finally, the PS also undertakes a concerted strategy of internal dissemination and international promotion of Portuguese Culture capable of reinforcing the external image of Portugal's heritage wealth and creative dynamism.
Provide a transversal character to cultural policy and develop networking between central and local administration
The PS will assume as a priority in this area the re-establishment of the Ministry of Culture as the first promoter of a coherent and sustained cultural policy and as a privileged interlocutor with other entities,
simultaneously promoting networking with local and regional decision-making centers
and strengthening its initiative and capacity, namely through the following measures:
• Integrate audiovisual, press, radio and new media into the sphere of Culture;
• Strengthen regional decision-making centers, promoting proximity cultural policies integrated into a transversal regional development strategy;
• Transfer to the regional decision-making level patrimonial tu-tela competencies and support for the creation of a local territorial scope;
• Strengthen the articulation and better operationalization of lines of financing and support for culture, namely establishing inter-ministerial funds that allow the articulation of cultural impact investments by the various ministries
and create transparent mechanisms for co-financing cultural projects between Central, Regional and Local Administration and private promoters and producers;
• Autonomize the areas of international policy on Portuguese language and culture and cooperation, museums and heritage and archives and libraries, guaranteeing for each of them solutions that enshrine the specificity of the respective management and that avoid mere uncritical fusion of subjects and competencies;
• Define new institutional and operating models for the State's cultural management and artistic production, which guarantee the flexibility and operability essential to the pursuit of its specific mission and its need for programmatic definition in the medium and long term,
eliminating formal organizational and procedural excesses that hinder action and support for the cultural initiative.
Educate for a more participatory culture
A more participatory and accessible culture for all will require the PS to have an integrated approach that mobilizes, in a transversal way, traditional channels of communication and transmission of knowledge and content - from compulsory education to public media service - and new digital platforms, reducing the cost and facilitating access through incentives for the consumption of cultural products.
The PS will: Reinforce arts and humanities content in general curriculum programs, at all school levels, and their interaction with other subjects,
as well as expanding the educational programs of cultural institutions;
• Define new management models specific to vocational artistic education, in partnership with the areas of education and culture;
• Affirm RTP as an instrument of public media service, valuing the educational and cultural dimension of this public service
and allowing full free-to-air access to all public service channels through digital terrestrial television.
Ensure, without jeopardizing its social influence, a relevant role in cultural and audiovisual policies, as well as in technological innovation and multiplatform offerings;
• Encourage coordination between radio and television operators, both public and private, and State cultural bodies, as well as partnership programs between them and private promoters, producers and creators;
• Expand the process of digitization and public availability of collections from different heritage areas, including archives, libraries and museums;
• Implement a digital network that makes available all information about the cultural and creative sector, including the dissemination of artistic initiatives and national and international funding programs;
• Promote and support the production of portals and digital content that enhance citizens' access to heritage and contemporary creation;
• Establish free access to national museums and monuments for young people up to the age of 30, during weekends and holidays;
• Create the Cartão + Cultura, to be attributed by employers to their workers for access to performing arts shows and the purchase of books and other cultural products, with the amount thus invested being considered patronage for tax purposes;
• Value National Theaters as centers of national creation, guaranteeing means that ensure the possibility of pursuing multi-annual projects with the necessary confidence, which is essential for their mission;
• Encourage accessibility for audiences with special needs to cultural activities and consumption of media outlets.
Preserve, value and disseminate material and intangible heritage
The PS views material and immaterial heritage as a very relevant component of the country's cultural and social identity;
as a factor in enriching relations between Portugal and the countries where it is located;
and as a rich and differentiating element for the attractiveness of regions and for the development of tourism.
There is, therefore, a collective responsibility to preserve, conserve and disseminate this heritage, guaranteeing broad access to its enjoyment, and ensuring its transmission to future generations.
In this sense, the PS will: Revitalize heritage networks, such as the network of Portuguese World Heritage Monasteries, the World Heritage Route or the Cathedral Route;
• Revitalize the Portuguese Museum Network with a view to increasing the value and qualification of Portuguese museums, their professionals and the services they provide to the public;
• Consolidate the public offering of museums and make their management models more flexible;
• Consolidate contemporary art collections in Portuguese museums, through, in particular, maintaining the Berardo Collection in Portugal and enriching the Serralves Collection;
• Promote the inventory of intangible cultural heritage in Portugal and Portuguese intangible heritage in the world;
• Carry out a rigorous survey of art collections that were initially in the private sphere and that are currently at risk of definitive extradition, for the eventual consolidation of contemporary art collections in Portuguese museums;
• Allow certain “flagship cultural facilities”, such as museums and monuments of special relevance, to benefit from greater management autonomy to implement projects that bring added value to culture, heritage, the economy and tourism;
• Create the National Sound Archive;
• Intensify the systematic digitization of documentary funds in Portuguese archives;
• Promote coordinated strategies and methodologies for the treatment and dissemination of archival heritage common to CPLP countries;
• Value the role of the RTP archive in disseminating our collective memory, encouraging its consultation
and supporting the creation of new works about its heritage, establishing new forms of articulation between this archive and the National Archive of Moving Images.
Promote greater economic valorization of cultural and artistic activity and launch an investment program for the recovery of historical heritage
The PS recognizes the importance of cultural and creative industries for boosting economic activity and creating jobs by promoting transversal policies that enhance synergies between relevant sectors such as tourism or construction (rehabilitation, recovery and restoration of heritage).
In this area, the PS will adopt the following initiatives: Launch an investment program in the recovery of historical heritage, based on the mobilization of community funds and the simplification of procedures for carrying out urban interventions,
aiming to: recover the historical heritage present throughout the national territory;
promote the training and professional retraining of workers linked to the construction sector;
promote national specialization in the area of ​​historical heritage recovery that could be explored in the field of service exports in this field;
and, also, reinforce a factor of strong appreciation of our country's tourism potential;
• Ensure that interventions for the recovery and conservation of historical heritage are carried out in accordance with hierarchies and priorities based on effective monitoring of its conservation status;
• Promote a plan for cultural and creative industries that integrates the different sectors involved, to consolidate a clear training strategy, access to financing, internationalization and protection of intellectual property appropriate to the economic potential of creativity;
• Move towards strengthening obligations to encourage Portuguese audiovisual production on the part of operators and distributors in the sector, in line with the evolution of economic recovery and without imposing disproportionate charges;
• Create a national brand for the certification, valorization and national and international promotion of traditional arts and crafts, also providing spaces and equipment for the transmission of this technical knowledge and learning;
• Restart the INOVArtes project to create international and national internships for professionals in the cultural field, as a way of encouraging the insertion of young professionals in the cultural and creative sector;
• Value artistic creation, cultural life and Portuguese material and immaterial heritage as pillars of the promotional image of Portuguese tourism;
• Create forms of cooperation between the culture and tourism sectors to define policies for dissemination and access to the national heritage and museum collection;
• Extend to cultural institutions with public utility status, by direct decision of the taxpayer, the possibility of consigning 0.5% of their IRS;
• Create more effective incentives for investment by companies and individual citizens in creative and heritage projects.
Value and dignify authors and artists and promote national creators in Portugal and abroad
The PS understands as essential the pursuit of policies that value and dignify authors and artists and improve the conditions inherent to the exercise of their professional activity
through better protection of their rights,
better access to support and financing and less job instability.
The valorization of national creators also requires their dissemination in Portugal and abroad, which will imply, on the one hand, a new boost to national cultural diffusion networks that contribute to facilitating access to culture throughout the territory
national and, on the other hand, concerted efforts at external promotion in order to enhance cultural and artistic internationalization.
In this context, the PS will assume the following commitments: Proceed with the regulation of the Employment Contracts Regime for Entertainment Professionals and the creation of the Artist Statute, responding to the specific challenges of a sector with a strong incidence of precarious and intermittent work , namely, the lack of unemployment protection and incipient forms of protection in old age;
• Rigorously define who the creators/authors are in each of the artistic disciplines
and create greater interconnection between authors and collective rights management entities, particularly in the audiovisual field;
• Improve the system for awarding support and grants for creation, through segmented public competitions, with transparent, clear rules and objectives, namely with the creation of a system of creative credits, and consequent supervision;
• Simplify and reduce bureaucracy in the administrative procedures for applying for support and decentralize some specific competitions, to allow for regional realities and their application on the ground;
• Strengthen and expand support for cultural distribution, exhibition and promotion across the country;
• Strengthen RTP's role as a financier of cinema and audiovisual works, either through its own protocols with the Instituto do Cinema e do Audiovisual, or on its own initiative;
• Optimize the use of community funds allocated to cultural and artistic internationalization, namely those from the Creative Europe Programme;
• Create the Portugal Criativo program, which supports cultural business projects aimed at internationalization, which promote Portugal's presence in art fairs, markets and festivals abroad and the international circulation of Portuguese authors and artists
, and that encourage the editions and translations of Portuguese works into other languages;
• Encourage the integration of national cultural organizations into exchange networks that enable the broad international circulation of Portuguese artistic creation and the hosting in Portugal of cultural events of a universal dimension;
• Encourage the adaptation of programming to RTP Internacional's different types of audiences, developing online tools taking new audiences into account.
Ensure freedoms of expression and information and of media bodies
Within the framework of fundamental freedoms and guarantees that the State is responsible for ensuring, special attention will be given to critical areas such as the provision of digital terrestrial television, the concentration and transparency of ownership and the incentive policy for media outlets.
Thus, the PS will: Expand the offer of program services through Digital Terrestrial Television,
as well as accelerating the process of modifying the distribution network in order to guarantee basic technical conditions for receiving radio, television and Internet signals.
The price imposed on television operators for the cost of distributing the television signal will also be reassessed;
• Strengthen the legal regime relating to transparency and concentration of ownership, which should not jeopardize the competitive capacity of Portuguese media groups.
The transparency regime should allow the identification of the entire chain of entities holding qualified shares in the media
and determine an effective accountability obligation that highlights the movement of capital of all media groups operating in Portugal;
• Ensure that support for the sector prioritizes the qualification of companies and their sustainability, namely by promoting the creation of new distribution models, the production of versatile and truly innovative content and the employability of journalists;
• Review the ERC financing model, ensuring its independence from political power
and ensure greater coordination with communications and competition regulatory bodies.
14. REINFORCE INVESTMENT IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, DEMOCRATIZING INNOVATION
Over the last twenty-five years we have witnessed a notable transformation in the quantity and quality of scientific and technological knowledge produced and disseminated in Portugal.
The strengthening of scientific and higher education institutions and the exposure of Portuguese researchers to more and better knowledge centers at an international level, complemented by public policies for financing scientific activity, made it possible to sustain knowledge transfer mechanisms between generations of scientists and between them and society in its different dimensions.
However, this path was interrupted in 2011, when the PSD/CDS government broke the broad social and political commitment to science, systematically using the argument of financing only “excellence” and increasing selectivity in access to science, especially with based on separate evaluation processes.
No scientific system is sustainable if it is based only on a restricted and exclusive group of scientists.
The policy results of the last four years show ill-informed options and wrong public policies, with changes to all procedures without properly calibrating and testing them.
Everyone, higher education institutions, teachers, scientists and students, criticized the policies based on ignorance and prejudice, based on the fury of destroying what was well done and which had guaranteed the success of science and the overcoming of backwardness. Portuguese scientist.
The practice of independent scientific evaluation was discredited and it became impossible to use its results as a strategic management tool within institutions.
It is now essential to regain trust in the science and technology system and ensure the predictability of public incentives, guaranteeing adequate planning of institutions and career management,
as well as the reestablishment of clarity, transparency and regularity in the functioning of scientific policy agents.
This objective is a priority, along with the guarantee that science is considered an inalienable right of all Portuguese.
Strengthen the internationalization instruments of the scientific system
The PS defends the reinforcement of knowledge internationalization instruments through the following guidelines:
• Strengthen Portugal's participation in European programs and other international networks and partnerships, especially at a transatlantic level.
• Strengthen international partnerships with international scientific institutions and internationally renowned centers;
• Invest in scientific diplomacy and relations with scientific diasporas, enabling our consular network around the world to engage in systematic dialogue with scientific diasporas and the knowledge networks that emerge, especially with leading scientific institutions and business groups worldwide.
• Relaunch the “GLOBAL Science” Program, facilitating the involvement of Portugal and Portuguese scientific and technological institutions in the training of researchers from Portuguese-speaking African countries, together with programs to promote Portuguese as a language of science, in a logic of using Portuguese for scientific and technological training and for promoting cultural industries.
Strengthen Public Administration with PhD researchers
The PS defends the qualification of the public sector, providing public bodies with more qualified professionals and that this objective can be achieved simultaneously with the reinforcement of investment in science and technology.
This policy option stimulates and increases employment opportunities for young doctorates,
guarantees the formalization of scientific employment after the doctorate,
contributes to the greater attractiveness of the national territory to attract highly qualified young people
and, furthermore, it guarantees the rejuvenation of institutions, attracting more and better scientists from all over the world, facilitating a mobility framework for researchers.
This objective can be achieved by establishing a contingent of Public Administration renewal of PhD researchers to be integrated into laboratories and other public bodies.
This measure must be adopted with the participation of institutions in the recruitment process and encouraging the mobility of researchers, facilitating the reinforcement of scientific employment following the guidelines of international organizations and best international practices.
Strengthen the national scientific and technological system and counter the precariousness of its researchers
With the aim of increasing employment opportunities for young doctorates, ensuring the formalization of scientific employment after the doctorate, contributing to the greater attractiveness of the national territory to attract highly qualified young people
and also guarantee the rejuvenation of scientific institutions, attracting more and better scientists from around the world and facilitating a framework that encourages the mobility of researchers, the PS will promote:
• Relaunch a new support program for research chairs for professors at public universities, with public funding until the retirement or retirement of those who occupy them.
This program should facilitate the opening of vacancies for new career assistant teachers, also aiming to:
• Promote the development of long-term research projects led by senior researchers;
• Renew teaching in higher education;
• Give younger researchers the opportunity to have university teaching careers in Portugal, in order to avoid forced emigration of the most qualified,
the abandonment of research careers and dedication to science,
precarious scientific employment or, simply, unemployment, offering everyone who is recognized for merit the opportunity to continue working in science in Portugal.
• Strengthen the scientific employment program, progressively replacing the award of annual post-doctoral scholarships over six years with the creation, for PhD researchers, of a much greater number of new Researcher contracts.
Post-doctoral fellowships should now have shorter durations and serve as a stimulus for the development of research careers.
• Strengthen the human potential and advanced training program, in all areas of knowledge, in order to give everyone who is recognized as having absolute merit the opportunity to study and obtain a doctorate in Portugal.
Strengthen scientific institutions and guarantee a new scientific evaluation program for R&D units. PS defends the creation of a new scientific evaluation program for R&D units, based on an initial audit process of evaluation and evaluation processes. consultation with the scientific community with a view to redefining methodologies.
This measure is essential to regain the confidence of scientific agents in the evaluation processes and allocation of funding for R&D activities.
This measure must be implemented together with a new “Legal regime for science and technology institutions”, in order to guarantee a long-term framework to reinforce the autonomy of scientific institutions and guarantee their correct assessment.
Strengthen and provide stability to the financing of projects and R&DO activities of competitions.
The program must provide for the adequacy of requirements, financing and evaluation instruments to the specific realities and needs of different scientific areas, recognizing the diversity of areas of knowledge.
Public support for R&D projects should aim to reinforce scientific and technological activity, encouraging projects with different types
and the possibility of submitting proposals throughout the year
and the guarantee of an incentive framework that encourages the guarantee of sustainability and predictability in the functioning of institutions.
Additionally, large-scale thematic mobilizing programs should be encouraged, aimed at solving societal and economic challenges and reinforcing international scientific and technological cooperation.
Strengthen programs and instruments to promote scientific and technological culture
The PS defends the promotion of public spaces for contact with science and technology, as platforms for economic, cultural and scientific development
and the launch of new actions for new audiences, including support for the inclusion of older people in the learning society.
To this end, the PS will adopt the following initiatives: Strengthening the national agency for scientific and technological culture - Ciência Viva,
including the creation and promotion of science clubs in all groups of schools, public and private, primary and secondary education;
• Strengthening scientific culture and science teaching, through competitive funding with peer evaluation.
• Strengthening museums and interactive science centers, through the mobilization of national and local support,
as well as new actions to attract new audiences, including the elderly.
• Launch of a systematic program to support intergenerational projects between researchers, higher education students and youth associations, with the aim of reinforcing young people's scientific culture and the intergenerational debate around knowledge.
Expand the scope and reinforce technology centers
Develop a program to reinforce technological centers as intermediary institutions between the production and dissemination of knowledge by companies, to be implemented based on best international practices.
This program: Must include regional actions in close association between local partners and higher education institutions to support applied technology units;
• It must stimulate the growth and creation of institutions and networks that act in the consolidation and valorization of knowledge,
creating qualified employment,
increasing the external competitiveness of companies
and guaranteeing projects capable of valuing our resources, our territory and our relations with the Portuguese-speaking world and the Atlantic;
• Improves access to markets, reinforcing the strategic advantages that our international positioning has for Portugal.
• Values ​​the strategic positioning that Portugal has for the world (and the Atlantic);
• Strengthens trust in the distributed network of higher education institutions, including polytechnic institutes, encouraging their connection to local actors and stimulating regional economies.
15. PRIORITY TO INNOVATION AND INTERNATIONALIZATION OF COMPANIES
The country has already made a very significant investment effort in strengthening the population's qualifications and catching up on scientific and technological delays.
However, there is an enormous potential of resources that is not being properly used to build a more competitive economy.
In recent years, the disinvestment in Science and in Portuguese qualifications by the PSD/CDS government has worsened this reality, making the challenge of innovation in the business sector even more urgent.
The PS will once again give a central role to the creation of innovative and technology-based companies, stimulating entrepreneurship and job creation that allows the full use of existing human capital
and accompanying the European ambition to build and implement a digital agenda, in order to pursue the digital transformation of the economy and society as a goal that allows us to increase competitiveness in the EU, with the creation of jobs.
In this context, the role of universities as catalysts for business development will be fundamental, with emphasis on the interior regions where they are seen as mobilizing knowledge.
Public demand will also have an important role to play in exploiting the innovative results obtained.
Cross-cutting public policies, including the simplification and digitalization of Public Administration, will also have an important role to play in accelerating the digital revolution leading to the production of goods and services incorporating more innovation and intelligence.
The new economic policy of the PS will also be based on reinforcing the dynamics of innovation and internationalization that will allow us to recover the trajectory of diversification of exports and production of increasingly sophisticated and differentiated goods and services, reinforcing the competitiveness of companies.
The PS will also make efforts to promote greater incorporation of national value in exports, recognizing its importance for creating more jobs and more wealth.
Attention will also be paid to import substitution dynamics
and promoting the consumption of national products.
Relaunch investment in innovation, research and business development
The productivity gains that the Portuguese economy needs, capable of achieving sustained and lasting growth, should be sought above all in increasing the value of production.
Without prejudice to the permanent search for greater efficiency in production processes, this increase in productivity through increased value added must be based on the qualification of human resources
and in reinforcing investment in innovation, research and development by the business community.
To this end, the PS assumes the following commitments: Launch new instruments for contracting public financial support (Contracts for Business Innovation) in order to encourage investments aimed at the production of new innovative products or services defined in partnership with companies, universities and other stakeholders that allow establishing development priorities/opportunities in new generation clusters that cross markets with emerging demands;
• Introduce the results of previous support as a consideration in the assessment of tax incentives for business R&D;
• Support the dissemination of business R&D results into means of production,
boosting innovation in companies and client sectors,
as well as promoting demonstrator projects and pilot lines, when it involves significant innovation, a re-producible process, or when it is not reproducible by competitors, is important to enable the production of new products;
• Positively discriminate, within the scope of granting public support, the number of registered patents as indicators of performance and success of Innovation and R&D activities,
reinforcing support for international litigation actions with the defense of intellectual property;
• Ensure that competitions within the scope of community financing for business R&D allow for the possibility of having a first phase of the project (phase with greater technical/scientific risk) which, in case of success, opens up the possibility of a second phase to finance the remaining part of the project, increasing the effectiveness of public support for business R&D.
Develop the “university-company connection” to a new level of innovation
In order to boost the transfer of technology and knowledge to the field of production and reinforce the management, technical and scientific skills of the business sector, the PS will convene Portuguese universities and entities of the Scientific and Technological System National to create an agenda in partnership with the government.
The objective is to give new impetus to the connection between universities and companies through a strong mobilization of existing national resources, structures and qualifications for the challenge of competitiveness.
Namely, the PS will take on the following priorities: Creating conditions to accelerate entrepreneurship levels through the installation and incubation of innovative companies at universities
as well as strengthening university technology transfer and employability teams;
• Ensure that the transfer of technology between universities and companies enables the development of technology by companies to the market, thus allowing financial returns to the institution holding intellectual and industrial protection rights;
• Relaunch the strategy of clusters and competitiveness centers, reinforcing support and commitment to the participation of public institutions in their promotion, placing the integration of collective efficiency strategies as an objective of the scientific and technological system (with financial incentives), increasing community support for companies that integrate collective efficiency strategies;•
Launch a program to reinforce technological centers as intermediary institutions between the production and dissemination of knowledge by companies following best international practices;
• Stimulate the transfer of scientific knowledge and its conversion into economic value for companies by reinforcing partial and transitional support for the hiring of doctorates by them;
• Promote the creation of program contracts between groups of companies and higher education institutions to update content or reinforce training lines, with public co-financing;
• Train technicians to support R&D, in training stages in public laboratories, followed by placement stages in corporate laboratories;
• Promote professional retraining for specialties with greater demand in the most dynamic industries;
• Encourage the requalification of company assets and managers, through support for action-training and/or continuing training programs, in universities and polytechnics, in schools and in companies themselves, taking advantage of the experience of private organizations that have been developing these actions were successful, with particular emphasis on the international training of SME managers.
Valuing innovation through public demand and empowering SMEs to respond to public markets
Public demand has the potential to play a very important role in valuing the results of innovation projects, functioning as a starting market, testing and improving the product and also creating the curriculum necessary for the internationalization and export of goods and services. by SMEs.
Bearing this reality in mind, the PS will: Promote demonstrative investments, on a scale and in real conditions of use,
with training of human resources for the appropriate use of new technologies and materials,
accelerating the arrival on the market of new innovative products in the development of which companies invested with the support of the previous community framework;
• Call on municipalities to, together with companies and universities, develop innovation and competitiveness projects of common interest (e.g.: urban rehabilitation; micro generation; autonomous energy production systems; smart cities; or others in export or that promote import substitution);
• Empower SMEs to respond to public markets: eliminate access barriers
, systematize and make databases available with detailed and updated information on planned and ongoing infrastructure investments;
offering technical support in certification or (pre)qualification processes as suppliers
and support in organizing consortia or other forms of cooperation between SMEs, in presenting proposals and identifying financing for customers;
• Promote investment and innovation in the health sector, with future impacts on total expenditure, such as projects aimed at combating contamination in hospital environments or more effective diagnostic methods;
• Launch a scheduled public procurement program for innovative goods and services for public services based on the identification of needs regarding services and goods that require R&D to be designed and produced, particularly in areas that allow for the improvement of public services and the reduction of public expenditure;
• Establish a quota for the acquisition of start-up goods and services in order to stimulate the emergence of new players in the market.
Open new export channels and reinforce the internationalization of the business fabric and innovative projects
The need to relaunch the economy on a path of strong and sustained growth presupposes that more and more companies seek to explore new markets where they can assert their competitive advantages and enhance the results of innovative projects.
The training and qualification of human resources in companies in tradable sectors
reinforcing investment with international promotion
and a more effective external commercial support network are fundamental areas of intervention.
To this end, the PS must: Renew the public entity responsible for promoting investment and foreign trade in Portugal
with the aim of strengthening the external and internal support network for companies, integrating human resources with greater international experience who can function as true commercial support agents for Portuguese SMEs;
• Ensure that community support for SMEs in the context of internationalization and exports also includes, under certain conditions, collaboration projects with large companies involving SMEs;
• Streamline credit insurance and pre-financing mechanisms for exports, encouraging their granting based on the proven existence of orders;
• Promote greater mobilization of human resources and skills in the area of ​​internationalization, involving the review and reinforcement of investment in INOV-Contacto,
the launch of programs to insert young staff into exporting companies
and programs that promote the return of young people with international experience to reinforce the internationalization area of ​​companies and support training programs in key internationalization skills;
• Evaluate conditions for more favorable taxation of costs and investments with international promotion;
• Promote the attraction of foreign entrepreneurs, bearers of talent, technology and access to international markets,
reevaluating the current tax regime for non-habitual residents in order to prioritize strategic areas of investment, net job creation and internationalization of the economy;
• Articulate innovation policies with export and internationalization policies, also aiming to accelerate the arrival of innovative results on the international market
and, simultaneously, help change the external image of the national economy with an impact on the appreciation of exports in all sectors;
• Make the developed equipment and software solutions replicable and exportable, constituting a new axis of specialization and a facilitator for internationalization for countries with shortages in human resources;
• Boost the country's participation in international cooperation networks in business R&D, concentrating these efforts in the same entity that manages support and boosts business-business R&D, favoring greater coordination;
• Create a support line for the internationalization of ongoing projects, to enable, with little increase in public resources, an increase in applications for international cooperation programs, such as Horizon 2020 or EUREKA;
• Stimulate cooperation and concentration between SMEs, namely through the creation of complementary groupings of companies or other forms of cooperation.
Investing in tourism as a strategic sector for employment and export growth
Tourism assumes special importance as a driver of economic and social dynamism in the regions, contributing strongly to the creation of jobs and growth in national exports, already representing almost half of service exports.
The planning and development of tourism proves to be fundamental in order to explore its economic potential and simultaneously ensure the sustainability of natural resources.
In this context, the PS will prioritize the valorization of resources and investment in human capital, a key factor for the sector, and the promotion of transversal policies that generate synergies, namely, mobilizing the sectors of culture, science, innovation, transport, training, urban rehabilitation and regeneration, with a view to qualifying and differentiating the offer and developing new business areas in the sector.
The PS will give special focus to policies to combat seasonality, boost domestic tourism, decentralize demand, promote accessibility and more effectively promote Portugal.
To pursue these objectives, the PS will: Invest in participatory planning of tourist activity, through a credible and well-founded National Strategic Tourism Plan
and Tourism Promotion Plans on a national and regional basis, with real involvement of tourism companies;
• Maintain and give credibility to the concentration in the public entity responsible for the promotion, valorization and sustainability of tourist activity of Public Administration competencies related to the sector, reinforcing it as the main interlocutor of companies and entrepreneurs in this field;
• Strengthen the competitiveness of the digital capacity of Portuguese tourism companies,
encourage e-business and increase the presence of Portuguese tourism on the internet in an aggregated manner;
• Boost the tourism sector as a factor in attracting high-quality foreign investment, for global repositioning and continuous improvement of the national offer;
• Ensure the presence of the destination Portugal on the internet and reinforce the effectiveness of the external tourism network in its promotion and sales;
• Promote air access to Portugal, in an articulated and integrated way, with the airport authorities and with the tourist offer;
• Value and dignify human assets in tourism, reinforcing the quality and prestige of Schools and Professions in the sector and improving the conditions inherent to the professional practice and ongoing training of workers in the sector;
• Value natural and cultural heritage as a differentiating factor for Destination Portugal,
developing visitable content and placing it at the service of citizens, in a context of effective collaboration between Culture and Tourism;
• Ensure full consonance between the application of the European Funds for Portugal 2020 and the strategic priorities defined for the Tourism sector in Portugal, avoiding duplication of criteria and inconsequentiality in the allocation of public resources;
• Implement a program to reduce the bureaucratic obstacles that still exist in tourist activities, rationalizing
the multiplicity of fees charged by various entities, which affect the licensing and operation of tourism companies;
• Promote entrepreneurship and the development of new tourism businesses,
taking advantage of the contributions of innovation, arts and science, in order to take advantage of the potential that exists in cities, protected areas and the rural world;
• Monitor the tourist offer, creating mechanisms to monitor the existing business reality, in order to allow entrepreneurs, investors and public decision-makers to make informed and knowledge-based decisions;
• Implement, in conjunction with the private sector, programs to combat seasonality, through the promotion of specific tourism products (namely health tourism, business tourism, sports tourism and religious tourism), tourism promotion targeted at identified segments (named -senior and youth mind) and attracting events and congresses;
• Link the development of Tourism with the improvement of quality of life.
Replace imports and promote national added value
Despite the importance of the export sector for the growth of the national economy being highlighted so often, the contribution of exports to economic growth differs from the level of imports incorporated in its production.
The lower the level of imports in national production, for domestic consumption and export, the greater the national added value, that is, the greater the creation of direct and indirect employment and the higher the incorporation of national resources associated with this production.
In this sense, the PS understands as a priority the design of policies that allow import substitution and greater incorporation of national added value in production for the domestic and foreign markets, proposing, for this purpose:
• Promote the correct implementation of a Portugal brand and its promotion and dissemination among producers and consumers;
• Introduce mechanisms that allow public support to be given priority to exporting companies, or those operating outside the country, whose production process incorporates greater national resources, similar to what is done in other European countries, in compliance with community standards;
• Permanently monitor multinational companies based in Portugal in order to quickly respond to their needs and develop concerted strategies to ensure an increase in the incorporation of national added value;•
Contract local development objectives (proportion of national purchases) with companies located in Portugal;
• Encourage “civil society” initiatives to create commercial and logistical circuits,
and use of specific payment systems, which contribute to boosting national production, directly linking national producers and consumers;
• Develop import substitution initiatives where there is greater external vulnerability and better potential conditions for competitiveness, particularly in the food sector, supporting the development of national production;
• Support measures that favor the alternative use of public transport, where investment has been made in underutilized capacity, or shared-use equipment, reducing the incentive to purchase and use one's own vehicle.
D. MORE COHESION, LESS INEQUALITIES
The fight against poverty, social exclusion and inequalities is today a national objective not only for reasons of equity and social justice but also for reasons of efficiency and social cohesion.
After four years of a policy that heavily penalized the most unprotected families and individuals,
which weakened the middle classes,
that drastically reduced pre-existing social support precisely at the moment when it became most necessary and that did everything to dismantle the Social State, it is urgent to reverse this cycle that led to the worsening of poverty situations and the increase in the concentration of wealth .
The levels of poverty, precariousness and inequality currently existing in Portugal constitute not only a clear violation of citizenship rights that jeopardize our democratic experience, but they also constitute an obstacle to economic development.
Poverty, and in particular extreme poverty, is a factor in weakening social cohesion.
The PS is clearly committed to defending and strengthening the Social State,
to implement a strategy to combat poverty and social exclusion,
to implement policies that promote employment and a decent wage
, to guarantee the sustainability of Social Security and the replacement of social minimums,
to lead Portugal on the path of growth and sustained development.
16. ENSURE THE SUSTAINABILITY OF SOCIAL SECURITY
With the reform carried out in 2007, the PS government removed the public Social Security system from the dangerous zone into which the right had let it fall and took a fundamental step towards strengthening its long-term sustainability.
For this reason, the pension system was left out of the troika program, which saw no need to take measures to reinforce the sustainability of Social Security.
However, in 2011, the PSD/CDS government looked at the crisis as a great opportunity and used the Social Security system not only to reduce the deficit, but also to create a conflict between generations, pitting pensioners against workers.
By deciding to cut pensions already awarded, the government insisted on violating a “confidence contract” with hundreds of thousands of pensioners and repeated the attack on the Constitution, fueling a climate of unpredictability in the accounts of those who entrusted the State with their reform and a climate of institutional conflict that stigmatized a generational group.
At the same time, the PSD/CDS strategy of “going beyond the troika” led to an explosion in unemployment and emigration and caused an abrupt drop in the birth rate.
This situation degraded the medium and long-term sustainability conditions of the Social Security system, serving the government to justify the decision to proceed with further cuts in pensions granted next year.
For all of this, the PS will make it a priority to carry out a rigorous assessment of the state of the Social Security system
and will move forward with a strategy that restores peace of mind to current pensioners, ensuring that there will be no further cuts to their pensions.
Looking to the future, prudent management will seek to improve the sustainability of Social Security by finding new sources of financing,
its justice, combating fraud and evasion
and completing convergence between the public and private sector
and, finally, the transparency of the system.
Finally, trust in the Social Security system is one of its most important assets, and it can only be ensured through greater understanding by citizens of their rights and duties.
To achieve this, the system must simplify, bring closer and facilitate citizens' access to information.
Promote sustainable and transparent management of Social Security through a rigorous assessment of the system’s evolution
The policies developed and the discourse of the PSD/CDS government in recent years have contributed to a loss of confidence in the Social Security system and to the creation of a situation that is financially much less stable and secure than that provided by the PS governments with the reforms which it introduced, namely through the introduction of the sustainability factor.
In effect, the policy of austerity and “going beyond the troika” had financially negative effects on Social Security due to the reduction in the number of taxpayers, with a drop in revenues related to contributions and contributions, and the substantial increase in expenses with the unemployment benefit, as a result of the high unemployment rate recorded, and the growth in pension expenses.
The current moment therefore demands that confidence in the system be reinforced but, equally, the solidarity that must exist between the various generations.
In this sense, the PS understands that any reform must result from transparent studies, providing rigorous and clear statistical information, scrutinized not only by the parties in Parliament but also by the social partners in Social Concertation, by academia and social movements (namely retirees and pensioners, precarious people).
Therefore, the PS will: Rigorously assess the evolution of the Social Security system in recent years, the impact of the measures taken and the effects of the economic crisis on the financial balance of pension systems, as well as the new challenges arising from demographic and labor market transformations;
• Promote transparent, retrospective and prospective studies, making rigorous and clear statistical information available for everyone to scrutinize;
• Create a form of permanent follow-up and monitoring of social policies and the state of Social Security, with the aim of carrying out a rigorous and independent assessment of policies and making recommendations.
The financial status and capacity of Social Security to ensure the payment of pensions and the sustainability of the system in the medium and long term must be made known annually, in a transparent, clear and accessible way to all citizens;
• Create a Social Security Statistics System (SESS) that will allow the timely dissemination of relevant, contributory and benefit data, allowing the evaluation of the evolution of policies in relation to their objectives, evaluating social impacts, as well as evaluating the procedures of entities/services that promote policies on the ground.
From the SESS, new statistical communication channels should be generated, made simpler according to different audiences and different evaluation objects, ensuring timely, clear, useful and easily findable information, contributing to greater transparency of the information system. Social Security.
Manage the Social Security system in a reformist manner with a view to strengthening its sustainability, equity and redistributive effectiveness
Improving the sustainability conditions of the Social Security system must take into account retirement age and life expectancy;
the country's demographic evolution;
changes in the labor market;
the income replacement rate;
and the effectiveness of contributory systems in terms of equity
and combating evasion and fraud.
This management should protect, in particular, those who are in a more fragile situation and with less adaptability,
as well as favoring taxpayers with very long contributory careers.
Within this framework, the PS will: Strengthen the financing and sustainability of Social Security through the diversification of its financing sources, such as:
• Increase the TSU of companies with high levels of pre-cariousness;
• Consign to Social Security the tax on inheritances exceeding one million euros;
• Extend the base of employers' contributions to Social Security to company profits, reducing the component that affects the wage bill of permanent contracts, in order to combat precariousness.
This diversification of financing sources will be carried out gradually, up to a final maximum of 4 percentage points, with the impact being assessed annually and in order to guarantee no decrease in revenue for Social Security.
In any case, social contributions will continue to be the main source of financing for the social security system;
• Ensure that the rules for calculating benefits already definitively awarded will not be changed;
• Strengthen instruments to support complementarity with individual savings instruments;
• Restore the fight against fraud and evasion as a priority,
investing in parallel with increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the system in the decision and payment of social benefits and the collection of contributions, in order to reduce the debt stock, increasing the financial resources of Social Security;
• Reevaluate the sustainability factor in light of the changes that have occurred, whether contextual or legislative
;• Reevaluate and reinforce the coherence of the model for applying the means test in social benefits of a non-contributory nature.
Combating contributory and benefit fraud and evasion
Within the framework of preserving the sustainability of Social Security, the PS defines as a priority the implementation of annual plans to combat contributory and benefit fraud and evasion,
aiming at effectiveness and efficiency in the collection of contributory revenue and debt through the reduction of bureaucracy in procedures, improvement of operating methodologies and increasing use of new technologies.
• In particular, the PS will: Change the process for declaring remuneration to Social Security through the implementation of unofficial remuneration declarations,
reinforcing effectiveness in detecting under-declaration behavior and minimizing the risk of contributory evasion;
• Make debt collection mechanisms more flexible and strengthen - improving the debt participation process,
streamlining payment procedures and entering into payment plans, with particular focus on making companies viable.
Debt collection should be faster, more timely and universal, through greater flexibility in the implementation of executive processes, as well as the optimization of the extraordinary debt settlement process;
• Improve and make the process of recovering undue payments more effective and reduce the volume of social benefits unduly attributed through the development of automatic procedures for periodic data quality control, the enrichment of the information contained in the information system, the reinforcement the automatic crossing of data without compromising privacy and the streamlining of procedures for concluding payment plans, as well as the improvement of the compensation process between debits and credits in the social security system;
• Restore the relevance due to inspection actions and their results
- invest in sectors of activity with a higher incidence of irregularities and in the selection of taxpayers and beneficiaries to be inspected, based on risk indicators, in order to direct inspection actions to areas and groups most susceptible to generating situations of non-compliance.
Ensure complete homogeneity of the Caixa Geral de Aposentações regime with the general Social Security regime
The PSD/CDS government has recurrently discussed the unsustainability of the Social Security system based on future charges from the Caixa Geral de Aposentações (CGA) and intentionally confusing the two subsystems, constantly omitting that the two systems have differences. substantial in terms of financing sources.
The path of convergence between the Caixa Geral de Aposentações Regime (CGA) and the General Social Security Regime (RGSS), carried out over more than a decade, now allows the assumption of total convergence.
The aim is to treat CGA subscribers and Social Security contributors equally, who will be future pensioners of both schemes.
Thus, the PS will provide a fully convergent regime between the CGA and the RGSS, ensuring complete homogeneity of the different regimes with regard to training and pension calculation rules,
eliminating discrepancies that remain in order to ensure more equal treatment.
Simplify and make the social benefit system more transparent
Citizens' trust in a Social Security scheme is largely based on the proximity and ease of access to relevant information about their rights and duties.
The PS understands that the response must be appropriate to each situation and adapted to the needs of citizens.
The triple channel of relationship with Social Security - online, telephone and in person - must be complementary to each other and perfectly integrated, in order to ensure adequate coverage and sizing.
On the other hand, it is essential to publish the legislation applicable to social benefits in a single document in order to facilitate and simplify access to information for citizens, drastically reducing the dispersion of information, thus allowing easier access to protection. existing society.
To pursue these objectives, the PS will: Promote the dematerialization of the service process, making online service the privileged channel of access to the Social Security system, with widespread use;
• Implement new functionalities that allow not only the consultation of the contributory career and the history of accrued benefits, the prediction of the value of the pension to be received and the online submission of applications, also exploring the potential of mobile devices as an emerging communication channel ;
• Reconcile online service with telephone service with an effective response capacity, service hours adapted to the needs of citizens and in-person service locations with adequate territorial coverage, serving, in particular, those who have greater difficulty in access to other service channels;
• Ensure permanent interaction between taxpayers and beneficiaries and Social Security through notifications on the individual Direct Social Security page, via email or SMS
;• Develop and approve a Social Security Benefits Code, which brings together in a single diploma the various legislative acts that create and regulate social benefits.
This measure presupposes: evaluating, in an integrated manner, the social security and social protection systems of citizenship, seeking to correct possible inefficiencies;
study and consider options for institutional simplification and simplification of the social benefit network;
and eliminate overlaps, inconsistencies and redundancies, minimizing waste and rationalizing policy instruments, in order to reinforce the overall effectiveness of the system.
17. BETTER FISCAL JUSTICE
A fair tax system must treat those with more income differently
and contribute to the correction of unjustifiable inequalities that prevent those with lower income from benefiting from effective opportunities for development and social evolution.
Furthermore, fair tax treatment implies stability and predictability in tax rules, so that people and companies can have confidence to make decisions.
People's lives and the success of business projects depend on a certain stability and predictability.
It is not possible to plan and program life projects and make decisions regarding personal and business investments without a minimally stable fiscal framework designed to ensure that a good decision taken in a certain fiscal context does not turn into a bad decision because that context has changed.
Fair tax treatment also requires a relentless fight against tax evasion and effective collection.
In a situation where more is demanded of people and companies, it is especially unacceptable for some to try to escape their citizenship obligations, paying taxes being one of them.
Fiscal justice therefore implies that everyone assumes their duties to the extent they are able, without some being exempt from doing so.
But the collection and payment of taxes cannot be done at all costs, without considering the means.
There must be proportionality in the demands and means used by the tax machine,
as well as strengthening and streamlining the means available to citizens to react to injustice in the assessment and collection of taxes.
With exaggerations that bring more immediate income, but that cause injustices that cannot be accepted, there is no tax system typical of a Rule of Law.
For the PS, fair tax treatment involves adopting rules that reduce unacceptable inequalities, ensuring the stability and predictability of the fiscal framework,
for the relentless fight against tax evasion
and by eliminating excessive and disproportionate tax demands.
To this end, the PS will adopt the following measures: Increase the progressiveness of the IRS, namely through the reanalysis of the IRS tax bracket structure taking into account the tax effort of citizens and families and the gradual elimination of the surcharge;
• Create a tax on high-value inheritances, contributing to a fairer and more inclusive society given the high level of taxation on labor income, the high inequality of income and wealth and the fact that the current lack of taxation of successions result in capital gains not realized during the holder's lifetime completely escaping taxation;
the tax must take into account the need to avoid phenomena of multiple international inheritance taxation;
• Eliminate the family quotient introduced in the 2015 State Budget, which has a regressive nature, replacing it with a deduction for each child that does not have the regressive nature of the current formulation, with a neutral effect from a revenue point of view Supervisor;
• Review of municipal property taxation, in the context of the objectives established for participation in public revenue and expanding participation in tax revenue generated in the municipality, with the aim of reducing wealth inequalities,
greater efficiency in the use of built heritage
and encouraging the adoption of economic development policies by municipalities;
• Conversion of contractual tax benefits in IRC into automatically operating tax benefits;
• Recognizing the importance of ensuring stable and fair policies for the resumption of private investment, create a framework of stability in tax legislation, namely ensuring that changes to fundamental aspects of tax regimes are made only once in the legislature (proposal for Law to be presented by the end of the 1st half of 2016);
• Allow anyone who has a credit with the State or other public entities to offset it with credits that taxes and Social Security have towards that person/company.
The measure is aimed at natural persons with income below a value to be fixed
and to small and medium-sized companies with revenues below a certain amount.
The amounts of tax/Social Security exempted from payment will be deducted from transfers that may be made to public entities that had the amounts in debt, within the framework of their financing through the State Budget;
• Prohibition of tax foreclosures on family homes in relation to debts worth less than the value of the asset forfeited
and suspension of the attachment of the family home in the remaining cases;
• Eliminate requirements to send documents and duplicate, useless or excessive information for tax purposes,
as well as eliminating declaratory obligations and information conservation obligations, whenever possible;
• Review of disproportionate and excessive amounts of fines and interest for non-compliance with tax obligations
and introduction of maximum accumulation mechanisms for fines imposed for administrative offenses committed by natural persons, namely for non-compliance with declaratory obligations;
• Limit excessive successive and permanent tax inspections to individuals and SMEs;
• Prioritize arbitration and other alternative and expeditious means of resolving disputes, namely reducing the arbitration fee in the absence of a prior graceful complaint and hierarchical appeal,
promoting new possibilities for migrating cases from State Courts to arbitration;
• Reduction of costs associated with tax arbitration, so that taxpayers with fewer resources or with low-value tax issues can also benefit from this quick, agile and effective way of resolving tax disputes;
• Streamline and make the situations and conditions under which a payment plan for fiscal, tax and Social Security debts can be negotiated and accepted, allowing a framework to be ensured that the taxpayer can trust, if the plan is complied with.
18. FIGHT POVERTY
Since 1995, the PS has innovated in the construction of new social policies, aimed at guaranteeing the social minimum for the most vulnerable citizens.
This was the case of the Guaranteed Minimum Income, to ensure that everyone has a minimum subsistence level,
of the Solidarity Supplement for the Elderly, to reduce poverty among the elderly
and with the reinforcement of family benefits for those who need it most, to reduce poverty in families with children.
A reinforced social protection system proved to be fundamental in responding to the 2009 international crisis, which increased unemployment and intensified family difficulties and social precariousness.
Since 2011, however, the State has stopped viewing its role of protecting the most vulnerable citizens as a priority.
As a result of the PSD/CDS government's policies, public support became an instrument for reducing the deficit of a government that went far beyond the troika, abandoning workers and families at a time when they most needed a safety net.
The enormous increase in unemployment and the retreat of the State contributed to the risk of poverty returning to the levels of the early 2000s.
If the protection network for the elderly – based on the Solidarity Supplement for the Elderly that the government neglected but was unable to dismantle – prevented the elderly from becoming more vulnerable, it was the families of workers who suffered most from unemployment and cuts in public support. blics.
Today, it is the group of working-age families and their children that is most at risk of poverty in Portugal.
The PS strategy for combating poverty must therefore be based on three fundamental axes.
Firstly, design a national strategy to combat poverty among children and young people that, in an integrated way, recovers the centrality of family allowances as a reference public support for families.
Secondly, ensure the replacement of support that guarantees social minimums to citizens in conditions of greater vulnerability (such as the Social Insertion Income and the Solidarity Supplement for the Elderly), preventing the country from going further back in the fight against poverty. -breza of the most fragile.
Finally, thirdly, dignify work, creating new public support for low wages to prevent working families with children from living in poverty.
Program to combat poverty among children and young people
The PS prioritizes the development of a Plan to Combat Poverty for Children and Young People with a well-defined time horizon and clear goals to be achieved.
This strategy must combine measures directly aimed at children and young people with measures that enable the increase in the resources of the families in which these children are inserted.
In this context, the reconfiguration of the family benefit system in order to reinforce its effectiveness is fundamental.
However, to interrupt the cycle of poverty, it is not enough to reduce monetary poverty.
It is also necessary to act to create conditions so that children and young people have equal opportunities, which presupposes access to quality education and adequate health care.
In this sense, the PS will take the following measures: Increase the amounts of family benefit, pre-natal benefit and increase for single-parent families benefiting from family benefit and pre-natal benefit;
• Reconfigure the family allowance in order to allow the combination of resource transfer policies with complementary measures on the public services side.
Families benefiting from family benefits must subscribe to a letter of rights and duties that ensures effective integration into the school system and the health system;
• Reformulate the income classes for access to family benefits so that children in poverty, and in particular those in extreme poverty, have access to sufficient resources to significantly improve their standard of living;
• Create a system of indicators to alert situations of social precariousness (school dropout, health problems, etc.) based on the monitoring of children benefiting from family benefits, enabling a more integrated action of the social protection system, in cases of drive;
• Consider the family benefit, totally or partially, an integral part of the resources condition of other measures, in order to avoid overlaps that would distort the objectives of both the family benefit and the other measures;
• Adopt an integrative approach to combating poverty, articulating several sectoral measures that must complement each other, enhancing synergies and investing in proximity measures, focused on children and young people and their families.
In this context, sectoral measures must be created to complement the anti-poverty services provided by the educational system and the health system (school meals, textbooks, “dentist check”);
• Define a strategy centered on the territory, privileging the areas most marked by critical situations of child poverty, namely through family intervention measures, based on proximity responses that enhance the synergies and dynamism of local structures.
Reinstatement of protection in the Solidarity Supplement for the Elderly as a central element in reducing poverty among the elderly
Since 2011, the PSD/CDS government has drastically reduced social protection for the elderly and, contrary to its speech, has not protected the poorest elderly.
It becomes clear that this government chose to reduce protection for the most disadvantaged elderly and the most dependent by reducing the reference value of the Solidarity Supplement for the Elderly (CSI) - the most effective instrument for reducing poverty among the elderly - from 5,022 euros per year to 4,909 euros per year (minus 113 euros).
In order to restore the level of protection of the CSI and reestablish this social benefit as a central element in the fight against poverty among the elderly, the PS assumes the following commitments:
• Restore the CSI reference value to the annual amount of 5,022 euros, restoring the annual values ​​previously in force and thus allowing elderly people who were excluded to benefit from this benefit again,
as well as updating the benefit for elderly people who have suffered a reduction in their nominal value;
• Evaluate the possibility of simplifying the network of minimum benefits that serve the same purpose in reducing poverty among the elderly, ensuring positive differentiation for longer careers.
Dignify the RSI by restoring its effectiveness
as a measure to combat extreme poverty
The Social Insertion Income (RSI) aims to guarantee social minimums by protecting the most fragile and vulnerable groups, distinguishing itself from other social support and benefits by including an integration and inclusion component, which is achieved through the signing of integration with benefit beneficiaries.
In more recent years, the RSI has been subject to a significant set of legislative changes, not only in the reference values ​​and applicable capitation, which determine the amount of the benefit, but also in the conditions for accessing the benefit and maintaining it. .
Furthermore, the insertion programs were becoming uncharacterized.
The ideological attack to which this benefit has been subjected, enhanced by the changes introduced by the current government, has resulted in a significant decrease in the number of beneficiaries, with an increase in the risk of poverty among the most disadvantaged groups.
In order to dignify the RSI by restoring its effectiveness as a measure to combat extreme poverty, the PS will:
• Restore existing levels of protection for families in situations of extreme poverty by 2010 in order to consistently reintroduce adequate coverage levels, thus reinforcing the integrative and inclusive capacity of this benefit;
• Reevaluate the effectiveness of integration programs, which have been de-characterized in recent years, in order to promote the adaptation of measures to the characteristics of the beneficiaries and the families in which they are inserted, so that they promote effective social inclusion.
Dignify work by effectively reducing the percentage of workers at risk of poverty, through a salary supplement
Combating situations of precarious employment and low wages is essential to ensure that those who work have a dignified life.
As a result of excessive job rotation and the increase in involuntary part-time work, many workers have an annual salary below the minimum wage.
This gives rise to the phenomenon of the “working poor”.
In other words, people who, despite working, cannot achieve a socially acceptable income.
To respond to this problem, the PS proposes: Creating an annual salary supplement, which constitutes a tax credit (“negative tax”), applicable to everyone who declares income from work to Social Security for a year.
This salary supplement will be determined depending on the income and composition of the household
and constitutes an additional mechanism for combating poverty,
as well as an incentive for integration into the labor market as it is only granted to individuals who declared income from work.
This annual salary supplement aims to increase the income of low-wage working families, as the amount of credit granted will depend on the number of children in the family and the income declared to Social Security.
Stabilize and develop cooperation with the solidarity sector
The PS, aware of the important role played by non-governmental organizations in the social area, as well as the socialist tradition of strengthening the mobilization of society to promote social cohesion, will continue to reinforce cooperation with this sector.
Within this framework, particular attention should be paid to cooperation with the solidarity sector in areas such as combating poverty,
to working closely to support families and communities,
and the integration of groups subject to risks of marginalization.
The PS will urgently propose the renewal of the Pact for Cooperation and Solidarity within the legislative period, which must follow the following principles:
• Medium-term stability of the state’s relationship with social institutions;
• Definition of an effective operational framework for the regulatory role of public institutions in matters of cooperation;
• Reinforcement of the priority to positive differentiation as a pillar of the cooperation model;
• Ensuring reconciliation between institutional sustainability and accessibility to social services.
19. BUILD A MORE EQUAL SOCIETY
The promotion of equality and non-discrimination is an ethical, legal and constitutional imperative in the defense and guarantee of fundamental rights.
The challenges facing the promotion of Equality today require a new model of social organization based on a new paradigm of social relations between people and their interaction with the territory.
A world that gives us back the place of community, valuing daily life and proximity.
A social model structured in new gender social relations that ensures that men and women live, in fact, equally in both the public and private spheres;
and that takes into account the different ways in which people suffer discrimination based on sex, gender, class, ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age, sexual orientation or gender identity.
The PS defends and will pursue political action that ensures a vision of the future and that invests in citizenship,
that values ​​social responsibility and business ethics and that structures public policies aimed at social and territorial cohesion.
A political project that generates new organizational cultures, namely through the promotion of plans for equality,
that promotes and integrates diversity and non-discrimination as factors of competitiveness, innovation and development.
Ensure an integrated approach to the various factors of discrimination
One of the main conclusions of the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All emphasized the need for clear public policy strategies to address the reality of multiple discrimination.
In this sense, it is important to promote the existence of legislative instruments that systematize and update the legislation produced within the framework of equality and non-discrimination policies, with a view to consolidating them and making their specific and transversal implementation more effective.
At the same time, it is important to reinforce the coordination of public entities with responsibilities in this field, in order to more effectively articulate responses and the implementation of sectoral plans and actions.
Therefore, the PS proposes to reinforce this integrated approach through the following measures:
• Preparation of a White Paper with a view to approving an Equality and Non-Discrimination Law;
• Establishment of a National Council for Equality and Non-Discrimination, as a body for coordinating Public Administration services and bodies with competences in the area of ​​Equality and Non-Discrimination (e.g. CIG, INR, ACM, CITE, Religious Freedom Commission , etc.);
• Preparation of an Action Plan for Multiple Discrimination, which allows for close coordination of plans for each area to promote equality and combat discrimination;
• Integration of issues relating to multiple discrimination in the drafting of legislation and in the monitoring and evaluation of policies and support programs.
Promote equality between women and men
The PS will develop a policy to guarantee equality between women and men.
It is necessary, on the one hand, to promote specific actions and, on the other, to integrate the gender dimension into all policies, as discrimination against women is multifaceted and aggravates other forms of discrimination.
It is necessary to promote the participation of women in decision-making positions in political and economic activity and implement the principle “equal pay for equal work of equal value”.
It is necessary to defend dignity, integrity and the end of gender-based violence.
It is essential to deepen policies for reconciling family life and professional life for men and women, including a greater sharing of parental responsibilities. AND
It is essential to promote a culture of citizenship, equality and rights.
To achieve this objective, the PS defends, among other transversal measures, the following actions:
• Promote with the social partners a commitment to introduce into collective bargaining instruments provisions relating to the reconciliation of work and family life,
and preventing and combating gender inequalities and sexual and moral harassment in the workplace;
• Evolve towards a minimum exercise reference of 33% of the total leave time actually taken by each person exercising parental responsibility, replicating other instruments to promote gender equality.
This measure implies, under the current regime, increasing the period of leave taken by men to 3 weeks, given that the period of leave that cannot be renounced by women is 6 weeks.
In the remaining time, the proportion of sharing of the right to leave must be encouraged, without prejudice to individual freedom in the shared organization of leave time;
• Promote gender balance at a level of 33% in management positions for companies listed on the stock exchange, public sector companies and direct and indirect administration of the State and other public legal entities;
• Promote an effective and efficient fight against pay inequalities between women and men at work in order to counter the worsening trend that this indicator has registered in recent years;
• Ensure the coordination and monitoring of all transversal strategies to combat gender-based violence and domestic violence,
emphasizing training, awareness-raising, prevention and deepening of knowledge, duly coordinated with the security forces, the judicial system and social protection mechanisms;
Promote the inclusion of people with disabilities
The inclusion of people with disabilities is a strategic objective for valuing people.
Only a society that integrates all people can realize its full potential.
The inclusion of people with disabilities has transversal implications for all areas of public policy, but priority objectives must be defined to guide action.
A first fundamental element is to recognize that we are faced with different situations of disability, with different degrees of dependence, which require different support, taking into account that the challenges facing integration are of a different nature.
This starting diversity must be taken into account when designing policy measures and social responses given to each case. The following action dimensions stand out:
• The educational focus on an inclusive 2nd generation school that should intervene in the context of special education and the organization of educational support for children and young people who need it.
On the other hand, it is important to guarantee access for people with disabilities to lifelong education, after finishing compulsory education;
• Definition of an employment and work strategy for all, giving a new impetus in this field and involving municipalities, associations representing employers, IPSS/NGOs, companies and other actors,
investing in professional training actions in the regular training system,
increasing the offer of professional internships for people with disabilities in companies, public sector organizations and solidarity sector organizations;•
Evaluate and reformulate social benefits by studying the advantages of implementing a single benefit model for disability that aggregates current benefits and that includes a fixed component, dependent on the household's income and the person's degree of disability, and a variable and updated component, relating to household expenditure on rehabilitation;
• Ensure the right of people with disabilities or disabilities to health, overcoming serious failures in terms of access and adequacy of therapeutic support for children, young people and adults with disabilities;
• Develop, in conjunction with municipalities, an “Inclusive Territories” program, which ensures physical and communicational accessibility,
a pedestrian accessibility program,
ensuring that all voting locations have accessibility conditions for people with reduced mobility, guaranteeing communication accessibility;
• Promote access for people with disabilities or disabilities to political participation and decision-making, as well as to the exercise of management positions in the Public Administration and in the public business sector;
• Combat violence and discrimination, especially against children, young people, adults and elderly people with disabilities.
Combat discrimination based on sexual orientation
The last decade was decisive in the implementation of an agenda for the protection and promotion of fundamental rights, based on the valorization of the Principle of Equality and the suppression of existing discrimination in the law.
In this context, it is important to complete the legislative changes triggered by the legal consecration of de facto unions between people of the same sex, in 2001, and marriage between people of the same sex, in 2010, as well as ensuring the reproductive rights of all women , regardless of your marital status.
It is proposed to implement the following measures to place Portugal, once again, at the forefront of countries committed to equality:
• Eliminate discrimination in access to adoption and civil sponsorship by same-sex couples (married or de facto partners), allowing the recognition of existing families, enshrining the fundamental right to the formation of a family for all people and ensuring the best interests of the child, today unprotected by a discriminatory law;
• Eliminate access restrictions, which still exist in the law, to medically assisted procreation techniques for same-sex couples and single women, determining that sexual orientation and marital status are not conditions for the constitution of a family and access to scientific methods open to the rest of the population;
• Improve the gender identity regime, particularly with regard to the need to provide for civil recognition of intersex people and improve the legislative framework relating to transsexual and transgender people;
• Value public policies aimed at eradicating discrimination based on sexual orientation,
expressly allocating to the Commission for Citizenship and Gender Equality the mission of promoting transversal and comprehensive public policies for the entire Public Administration, particularly in the field of training and awareness-raising.
Promote the conditions for the realization of religious freedom
The Portuguese State is bound by international commitments and guidelines from the European Union, the Council of Europe and the United Nations that aim to ensure the exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and promoting the principle of equality and non-discrimination.
The domain of religious freedom calls for a central and demanding public debate regarding the guarantee of the conditions for exercising religious freedom, within the framework of a secular State capable of promoting Inter-religious and Inter-confessional Dialogue.
The PS proposes to implement these commitments through the following measures: Reconfiguration of the Commission for Religious Freedom,
increasing its scope and operability,
reinforcing the pluralism of its composition (in order to integrate representatives of other confessions with increasing expression)
and its mission to promote coexistence and dialogue between confessions and between them and non-believers;
• Introduction of a national initiative for Interreligious Dialogue, taking advantage of the exceptional conditions of good relationships between confessions and communities that Portugal presents, allowing the promotion of Interreligious Dialogue in a more structured way,
preventing the occurrence of discriminatory phenomena,
halting the risk of growth of radical, extremist or fundamentalist approaches (like those we have seen in other contexts),
and promoting efficient channels of dialogue between believers and non-believers, the State and other public powers, and the various communities based in the country.
E. A GLOBAL PORTUGAL
Recent years have seen a weakening of the Portuguese position on a global scale.
To financial weakness, with the direct intervention of international institutions in the country, was added a deliberate erasure in Portugal's external affirmation, largely resulting from an option by the PSD/CDS coalition government for a discreet and low-level intervention. profile in the World and Europe.
The international image of our country appears today at one of the lowest levels in recent memory, compared to our partners and the multilateral structures we are part of.
To this was added a budgetary and functional decapitalization of the entire external and diplomatic action machine, in a movement that today appears to have had very significant negative effects on the country's capacity to protect and project its interests, as well as to sustain prestige on an international scale, which Democracy had helped to acquire and qualify.
Historically, PS governments have given constant attention to foreign policy, whether in the European area,
both in the broad fabric of bilateral and multilateral external relations, particularly in the area of ​​Lusophony, and in policies relevant to Portuguese communities.
Likewise, these same governments were always concerned with providing coherence to the set of sectoral dimensions that were found to be decisive for Portugal's presence in the world, especially with regard to the defense and promotion of the various national economic interests,
as well as the prestige of Portuguese culture and language.
Portugal was also able, over many years, to project a clear philosophy in the international order, promoting peace, defending Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law, along with a consistent attitude within the scope of cooperation and development.
Given the decline of recent years, these priorities must now guide the PS in the future, with emphasis on the affirmation of the Portuguese language,
for the implementation of a Portuguese-speaking citizenship
and to strengthen connections with Portuguese communities abroad.
Since national identity is, in the first instance, European, Portuguese-speaking, Ibero-American and Atlantic, Portugal must prioritize in its external relations participation in bilateral and multilateral organizations and forums of these priority areas of action: the European Union
the CPLP, the Iberian and Ibero-American dialogue forums
e a OTAN.
However, the country has specific and strategic interests in other geographies and must promote the fact that it is a country open to the world, cultivating economic, cultural, scientific and political relations with all regions and valuing participation in other relevant international organizations, such as the Council of Europe, the OSCE and the WTO.
In terms of these multilateral relations, Portugal must have as the main pillars of its foreign policy the defense of democratic values ​​and human rights,
combating terrorism and armed conflicts,
and the promotion of sustainable development, especially with regard to the fight against climate change.
Its active participation in the United Nations system, through qualified intervention in the main bodies, specialized agencies, funds and programs, is an essential element for affirmation in the World.
It is also in this context that Portugal's responsibilities within NATO must be understood.
and the role of the Portuguese Armed Forces in building and maintaining peace,
and in the fight against threats to collective security and common well-being, namely the most recent challenges of contemporary societies, which Portugal must not neglect: terrorism and the phenomena of violent religious extremism, cybercrime, threats to maritime security, the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, human trafficking, illegal migration and the lack of protection of refugees and political asylum seekers.
In this context, Portugal must also promote, with a view to pursuing and consolidating the Millennium Development Goals, sustainable development models, both in environmental and social terms,
combating global competitiveness trends that are based on the erosion of social rights or the overexploitation of resources.
In line with this, Portugal must set an example in supporting cooperation and development, especially with countries and regions around the world with which we have historical ties,
whether in the form of development cooperation with institutional capacity building, education, governance and security policies,
whether in the form of humanitarian and emergency aid, or in the form of technical-military cooperation programs.
In terms of bilateral relations, in addition to the importance of the Portuguese-Spanish dialogue, the articulation with our European partners and the obvious cultural and sentimental ties that unite us with the Portuguese-speaking world, Atlantic relations and those with the Ibero-American states, as well as strengthening links with emerging powers, not forgetting the ancestral links to several states, namely the Maghreb, India and Asia-Pacific.
It is also important to make a strong commitment to economic diplomacy, cultivating excellent relationships with our usual commercial partners, but also exploring new networks and channels of economic relationships in other latitudes.
In this way, given the importance of external action in the economic domain – to promote foreign trade and attract tourism and investment –, the PS will not fail to enable and strengthen the State’s instruments aimed at the international projection of its economic potential. .
In this context, a first-rate tool for Portugal's international projection is its flag airline, TAP, which is a key vehicle connecting Portuguese-speaking Africa, Brazil, the main destinations for Portuguese emigration and the promotion of internationalization. of the Portuguese economy.
For this reason, the PS will not allow the State to lose ownership over the majority of TAP's share capital, finding ways – namely through effective action with European institutions and the capital market – to capitalize, modernize and ensure the -development of the company, at the service of the Portuguese and a strategy of Portuguese-speaking affirmation.
20. PROMOTE THE PORTUGUESE LANGUAGE AND LUSOPHONE CITIZENSHIP
The recognition of Lusophony as an economic, educational and identity space implies the design of political proposals capable of meeting strategic objectives that include linguistic valorization and the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries (CPLP)
through diplomatic cooperation, with a view to the political, economic, scientific, cultural and social development of the Portuguese-speaking space.
It is a common space for more than two hundred million Portuguese speakers that must be beneficial to all Member States
. It is on this assumption that it can and should be valued, assuming itself as a space for social and economic development, for sharing knowledge and training human capital, with a view to full participation in the global knowledge society, institutional and economic cooperation in decisive sectors (with emphasis on public health, education, justice, tourism, agriculture and the sea), exchanging people, cultures and experiences and sharing citizenship.
The Portuguese language is a potential factor of strategic unity in foreign policies within the framework of Lusofonia and in Portugal's affirmation in the world.
Portugal is not the exclusive owner of the Portuguese language, which is the common plurinational heritage of its speakers.
However, our country cannot fail to assume its responsibilities, not only in the global dissemination of Portuguese culture, but also in the teaching and international appreciation of the language.
For this reason, the Portuguese language must be the target of a national strategy that involves the entire government, especially areas that have relations with the outside world.
In this context, it is extremely important to reinforce cooperation with Portuguese-speaking countries, whether in terms of our bilateral relationship or through the CPLP, which is important to boost with more investment and political initiative from different governments.
This cooperation must be transversal and must be accompanied by a strategy that covers different areas such as citizenship, economy, culture, education and heritage.
Defend the unity of the Portuguese Language
Portuguese is, in its own right, one of the largest multi-national languages, with more than 200 million speakers.
As the Portuguese language is one of the great assets of the countries that share it, starting with Portugal and the Portuguese communities spread around the world, it is important to recognize it as a factor of identity but, above all, as a cultural added value , scientific, political and economic.
Therefore, valuing the language and relations with Portuguese-speaking countries is not only a constitutional responsibility, but also an investment, both in the potential of the CPLP and beyond.
To ensure the unity of the Portuguese language within the CPLP space,
promote economic and social development
and intensify scientific cooperation, the PS will seek to boost:
• The implementation of the actions necessary for the orthographic harmonization of the Portuguese language and technical and scientific terminology, in accordance with the established agreements;
• Establishing partnerships with specialized academic bodies and similar institutions in other Portuguese-speaking countries and improving instruments for monitoring the evolution of the Portuguese language;
• The creation of a Portuguese-language economic space with the elimination of barriers to commercial transactions and investment,
common legal rules,
automatic recognition of public documentation
and a favorable tax and customs environment;
• The creation of a Portuguese-speaking company statute that allows and facilitates the formal recognition and automatic registration, in each of the Portuguese-speaking countries and territories, of companies and other economic agents originating in other countries and Portuguese-speaking Territories;
• The creation of a registration system for Portuguese-speaking brands, allowing through a single registration to obtain and use a valid and protected brand in all CPLP countries;
• The development of a Program to support the creation of Portuguese-speaking multinational companies;
• The promotion of a common space for the development of information and communication technologies and their application to the modernization of companies and the State;
• The creation of common public services, through interoperability mechanisms between public services in the different CPLP countries, similar to what already happens between Cape Verde and Portugal;
• The creation of a university exchange program specifically aimed at the circulation of Portuguese-speaking students, establishing an Erasmus at CPLP, aimed at students and teachers;
• The creation of common, public and private, research and development lines and programs between higher education institutions and research centers, including sharing of good practices in terms of transferring results to society;
• The development of a multifaceted CPLP cooperation space, within the scope of scientific research around the sea, international trade, the valorization of the coastline, the promotion of fishing and the economically and environmentally sustainable exploitation of marine resources, through the creation of a program: the Oceans of the Portuguese Language;
• The establishment of exchange programs in primary and secondary education;
• The development of a common space for distance learning based on the use of ICT and the use of social networks, in collaboration with public entities and the social sector.
Recognize Lusophone Citizenship
Deepening the dimension of political and social cooperation involves, from the outset, expanding the range of citizenship rights, reciprocally recognized within the CPLP space, giving an increasingly expressive body to the CPLP notion of citizenship.
The treaties of friendship and general cooperation between Portugal and the other CPLP countries, namely that of equal rights between Brazil and Portugal, constitute an example of what can be negotiated, now on a transnational basis.
It is essential to promote a stronger CPLP with greater diplomatic and practical importance, whose role is felt in the lives of citizens in Portuguese-speaking countries.
We live in times of globalization and crisis simultaneously, which require a reinforced CPLP through the pillar of citizenship, with the aim of fostering dialogue and diplomatic cooperation.
To this end, the PS will seek to promote: The creation of the “Lusophone Citizen Charter”, as a legal instrument recognizing all citizens of various rights in the Lusophone space,
such as freedom of movement and residence,
the recognition of academic and professional qualifications,
the exercise of political rights and the portability of social rights;
• The signing of the CPLP Multilateral Social Security Convention, as well as its effective application;
• The dissemination of agreements on circulation and citizenship that cover matters relevant to Portuguese-speaking citizens and which are often unknown to citizens and not applied in the CPLP;
• The creation of a network of arbitration, conciliation and mediation centers in the Portuguese-speaking economic space;
• The creation of Lusophone-based pan-African banking platforms;
• Deepening the potential of Portuguese-Chinese economic relations and the Fund for Economic and Commercial Cooperation between China and Portuguese-speaking Countries;
• The international affirmation of the CPLP, namely through a more cohesive and visible presence in the United Nations system;
• The promotion of common language policies that involve cultural and identity content;
• Develop a cooperation program in the field of energy in the Portuguese-speaking economic space.
Define a joint strategy to consolidate Portuguese in the world
Consolidating the position of the Portuguese language in the world will depend on a joint and concerted strategy that reinforces its use both in the education systems of several countries and in international organizations.
The recognition of the Portuguese language as an official working language, as well as the cultural and tourist valorization of the common linguistic heritage, should be a priority that will only have repercussions if there is an adjusted strategy with other Portuguese-speaking countries.
To achieve this objective, the PS will: Enhance the presence of Portuguese in the education systems of several European, African and American countries, not only through the traditional face-to-face system, but also through distance learning, namely through digital support platforms for e-learning, in a partnership between universities and the Camões Institute;
• Enhance the use of Portuguese as an official language in international organizations, especially in the United Nations system;
• Promote, by agreement and at the request of Portuguese-speaking countries and territories, in which Portuguese does not play an effective role as a lingua franca or communication between different ethnic groups, bilingual teaching initiatives that associate language teaching Portuguese teaching of Portuguese-based Creole or other mother tongues;
• Identify, study and interpret common material and immaterial heritage, namely sites, monuments, military, civil and religious architecture and their integrated artistic values;
• Train cultural and economic agents for the preservation and conservation of heritage;
• Establish multilateral agreements, with the aim of cultural access and enjoyment;
• Create financing networks for the rehabilitation and revitalization of common or shared heritage,
as well as combining efforts to enhance, classify and promote them, particularly within the framework of UNESCO World Heritage;
• Create a common digital historical collection (encyclopedia of the Portuguese-speaking space);
• Promote the design of tourist-cultural itineraries, with local, national and international routes, aimed at defining a CPLP Common Heritage Route;
• Produce audiovisual content, such as fiction, documentaries, animation, according to specific audiences and objectives;
• Study and reform the programming of RTP Internacional, RTP África, RDP Internacional and RDP África so that they serve the strategic interests of promoting the Portuguese language, culture and economy,
encourages a sense of belonging in our communities around the world
and promote ties with the people of CPLP countries
and that promotes the circulation of original CPLP programs in the respective countries and in third-party markets;
• Promote young talents in the world of arts, namely music and dance, literature, theater, cinema and audiovisual and visual arts.
Promote books, authors and reading
The promotion of books, reading and Portuguese-speaking authors follows a strategy of creating reading habits through the consumption of bibliographic material in Portuguese.
To this end, it is important to: Restart the Lusofonia Bibliographic Network Program
and Portugal's presence in the main international book competitions, in a continuous agenda of supporting Portuguese-speaking countries and communities, but also of intensifying the internationalization of Portuguese literature;
• Maintain expansion and promote the dynamization of the National Network of Public Libraries, resuming partnership programs for its dynamization;
• Review the processing of legal deposits, in particular the requirements required of publishers and the effective capacity to process and make available the deposited species, also considering its extension to phonograms and videograms;
• Increase the National Register of Digital Objects (RNOD), the Public Libraries Knowledge Network Portal and Portuguese participation in Europeana (European Digital Library);
• Create the Banco Solidário do Livro, as a measure to encourage book donations;
• Reestablish special programs dedicated to comics and magazines of cultural interest;
• Use Portuguese as a language of science;
• Promote content in Portuguese on the Internet.
21. CONTINUE PORTUGUESE IN PORTUGUESE COMMUNITIES
It is estimated that a third of the national population, around 5 million Portuguese, are currently residing abroad.
In addition to the symbolic charge of this number, it is also demonstrative of a powerful economic, cultural and political force.
Portugal, in fact, is not limited to its land or sea borders.
Portugal is continued in every national citizen who organized his life abroad and who represents our country there.
This circumstance entails increased responsibilities and challenges for the Portuguese State, but it also constitutes an enormous added value that we must know how to take advantage of.
Furthermore, in recent years, as a result of the crisis and the wave of emigration promoted by the PSD-CDS government's austerity policy, many Portuguese people – especially many highly qualified young people – were forced to leave their country and look for work. in other stops.
It is crucial, therefore, to maintain and encourage the connection of these new emigrants with their homeland, support them in the host countries and safeguard their rights as national citizens.
It is important not to forget that, even abroad, these compatriots are helping to build and move Portugal forward.
Not only do they give prestige to their country for the work they do, they also contribute considerably to the national GDP.
Also for this reason, the role of communities should not be seen as a subordinate issue when thinking about the governance of Portugal.
It is true, however, that Portuguese people abroad need recognition, not paternalism.
Communities need to be truly understood in all their diversity and specificity and not be diminished by the clichés that still persist.
Portuguese emigrants in the world are Portugal's best ambassadors, so by valuing this diaspora you are automatically valuing Portugal.
It is therefore important to make a break with the policies towards communities of the past.
To achieve this rupture, it will be necessary to promote transnational resources, modernize the connection between Portuguese institutions and the diaspora, invest in economic, social, educational and cultural exchange, as well as, permanently, emphasize the importance and amplify the role of communities Portuguese in the world.
These are, in short, the vectors that the PS will assume when it comes to its relationship with communities.
Facilitate the connection of Portuguese residents abroad to national public entities
Portuguese citizens residing abroad often need to interact with Portuguese institutions and the institutions of the States where they reside to resolve issues relating to their lives.
Furthermore, access to consular services is the cornerstone of institutional and administrative contact between Portuguese residents abroad and national institutions.
The ineffectiveness and inaccessibility of these services seriously jeopardizes the full exercise of the status of Portuguese citizens by those living abroad, thus causing a weakening of their rights and duties.
• As such, the PS will: Identify what types of services citizens residing abroad need most and provide them in a simple, accessible and accessible way;
• Modernize the consular network, namely by developing access to online services or even mobile services, with a view to simplification and proximity to users;
• Create an e-Consular Counter, to be integrated into the Citizen and Communities Portal, which will allow the dematerialization of many consular acts,
ensuring access for citizens anywhere in the world and reducing the need to travel to consular posts;
• Eliminate all forms of discrimination and bureaucratic obstacles regarding the tax situation of Portuguese residents abroad, in particular by facilitating the payment of IMI in cases where the owner is not permanently in Portugal;
• Facilitate contact and the handling of matters by Portuguese residents abroad with Portuguese Social Security;
• Widely publicize the rights of Portuguese emigrants in terms of tax, labor or pension rights.
Enhance the exercise of citizenship and representation of communities
Citizenship is the cornerstone of a republican vision of our common life.
Participation in the “res publica” is essential for Portuguese people to feel like citizens, both in their country of origin and in their country of residence.
Unfortunately, Portuguese people abroad often do not exercise their rights, nor are they aware of them.
To reverse this situation, the PS will: Provide for the adoption of new voting methods that encourage the participation of citizens residing abroad;
• Enshrine the possibility of having Deputies with dual nationality in their respective circles of residence;
• Simplify and speed up registration on the electoral roll at consular services;
• Allow the renewal of the Citizen Card in Portugal while maintaining residence abroad, that is, without losing registration on the electoral roll in the country of residence;
• Promote actions in favor of citizenship among elected officials and actors in Portuguese life in the diaspora, particularly actions aimed at youth.
Strengthen solidarity with Communities
The governance of the PSD-CDS and the application of a stifling austerity policy for all Portuguese resulted in an unprecedented wave of emigration post-25 April.
These “new” emigrants, with and without qualifications, emigrate desperately and without any type of preparation in relation to the country where they arrive.
They often do not know the language or procedures specific to each country, easily falling into a precarious situation.
This new reality should be part of the next government's priorities, without obviously forgetting the concern for long-term residents abroad, particularly the elderly.
Thus, the PS will: Strengthen support within the scope of ASIC – Social Support for Needy Elderly People and ASEC – Social Support for Needy Emigrants;
• Guarantee sustained support for structures responsible for helping emigrants most in need;
• Institute mechanisms for monitoring the working and accommodation conditions of emigrants in situations of greater precariousness, acting decisively to safeguard basic conditions of human dignity;
• Propose and promote the review of international Social Security agreements in force, with a view to strengthening the social protection of migrant workers and their families;
• Expand the network of international Social Security instruments, through the conclusion of new agreements with countries with which there is no international instrument, taking into account the migratory contingent with these countries.
Promote investment, entrepreneurship and internationalization
The possibilities for economic development in connection with the diaspora have not yet been fully explored and the room for maneuver is very significant.
A serious and committed effort in this field will bring considerable results for the country's growth in the very short term but also in the long term, with lasting results.
In this context, the PS will: View communities as a lever for the internationalization of the Portuguese economy,
using local structures for this purpose, such as chambers of commerce, thematic associations, cooperation between cities, etc.;
• Promote investment by emigrants and Portuguese descendants in Portugal in priority sectors (tourism, commerce and industry, culture), but also in the social and health sectors;
• Value and support Portuguese and Portuguese-descendant companies abroad, particularly through the development of strategic international partnerships between companies.
Keeping culture, arts and memory alive
Our culture is the cement that unites Portugal and communities in a profound way.
It is, therefore, a central theme in connecting communities to Portugal.
Thus, the PS will: Intensify exchanges between Portugal and communities in the field of arts and culture,
either through itinerant exhibitions and shows, or by recognizing and valuing Portuguese and Portuguese-descendant artists;
• Adapt the offer of teachers and courses to the demand for classes in teaching Portuguese abroad,
in order to expand this type of teaching and cover all regions with large concentrations of Portuguese;
• Guarantee communities’ access to modern and up-to-date means of communication, in particular by focusing on online and promoting a significant improvement in the quality of RTP Internacional’s broadcasts;
• Develop an action plan for political lobbying, working with the press and mobilizing civil society in Portuguese communities with the aim of promoting the image and projection of Portugal and its communities abroad.
Boost the associative network and youth
Associative activity is, by nature, the most dynamic form of civil society participation in community life.
Portuguese residents abroad find here a platform for interaction with other members of the community and it is through this that they actively participate in supporting integration in the country of residence, but also in the preservation and transmission of the culture of their country of origin.
In this context, particular attention must be paid to youth and the preservation of a link with second generations.
To this end, the PS will: Boost the associative network, particularly through support for collectives and association federations
and the development of inter-associative cooperation, with the aim of developing integration in the host country, as well as social support, culture and arts or even sport;
• Promote intergenerational activities (culture, sport, etc.) and the intergenerational transmission of skills, particularly within the scope of associative management;
• Create a youth exchange program between Portugal and communities, inspired by the INOV-Contacto and INOV--Artes models, but aimed at young Portuguese residents abroad, aiming to provide them with professional experiences in the national territory;
• Facilitate the validation and recognition of qualifications, diplomas and skills, valuing training abroad;
• Create specific ways to provide support to young emigrants in Portuguese consulates.
