Federal elections
Our decalogue for the 2019 federal elections
The Ticinesi League is fighting for:
1. NO to the EU: masters in our house
NO to the framework agreement with the EU,
NO to foreign judges,
NO to Brussels diktats.
Cancellation of the free movement of persons as well as the 1974 Convention on cross-border workers' refunds.
No cohesion contribution to the EU.
NO to the UN Pact on Migration.
2. Work: ours first
Replace the useless "light indigenous preference" desired by the party system with the indigenous preference voted by the people.
Investing to promote the hiring of unemployed Swiss workers.
Less bureaucracy and fewer taxes for companies that create jobs for the Swiss.
Defense of what remains of our financial center.
NO to the abolition of banking secrecy for Swiss citizens.
Public contracts only to Swiss companies registered in the sector for at least 5 years and with at least 50% Swiss or domiciled staff.
3. Autonomous migration policy
We decide on immigration.
Limitation of family reunions.
Rapid and safe expulsion of all foreigners who commit crimes or abuse our social community: enough with the exceptions!
Reduce social benefits for foreigners: we are not the country of Bengodi!
Systematic repatriation of economic migrants, reception only for the truly persecuted.
No new asylum centers in Ticino.
All Islamic terrorists must be removed from Switzerland; and if they find themselves in danger in their country of origin, too bad for them!
4. Defense of our values
We defend our identity, our traditions, our roots and our freedoms.
Stop the dismantling of our militia army.
NO to the Islamization of Switzerland: migrants arriving from "other cultures" adapt to our rules or return to their homeland.
Ban on foreign financing of mosques and Islamic cultural centers.
Valorization of popular rights!
What the people vote for must be applied to the letter and quickly.
Our Constitution comes before international agreements.
International treaties that are contrary to the will of the people must be terminated.
5. Stop easy naturalizations
Stop the easy naturalizations of people who are not integrated and/or dependent on the welfare state; limited number for naturalizations.
The Swiss passport is not a right, but a reward for those who demonstrate that they deserve it.
Withdrawal of Swiss citizenship from naturalized citizens who are guilty of particularly serious crimes.
6. No to raising the age
AVS and priority for the Swiss in social relations
Let's help the Swiss first.
Stop immigration in our welfare state.
Massive cuts to foreign aid and asylum spending, and more money for the First Pillar.
No to raising the AVS age!
7. Sustainable health insurance
Use the profits of the Confederation and the National Bank for the First Pillar and to reduce health insurance premiums.
Creation of a single, public health insurance fund.
Yes to capping the health insurance premium at 10% of household income.
8. Environment: no to hysteria, yes to reason
No to climate hysteria, yes to a reasonable environmental policy, which is at the forefront of reducing immigration and border crossings.
Increase in the tax on heavy traffic charged to foreign trucks that transit parasitically through Switzerland, in order to discourage the use of our country as a "low-cost corridor".
No to new ecotaxes (or an increase in existing ones) for Swiss road users.
The completion of AlpTransit (both South and North) is a priority.
9. Secure borders
Strengthening of customs staff.
All crossing points must be constantly manned.
Secondary crossings closed at night.
10. Stop persecuting motorists
Abolition of Via Sicura
and the traffic doctor.
No al road pricing ed al mobility pricing.
No to the increase in parking fees, which should instead be decreased.
Stop reducing parking spaces.
No artificial increase in petrol prices.
More investments in road infrastructure, including against noise.
