I. OUR VALUES
1. The Lithuanian Social Democratic Party is loyal to social democratic values, principles and goals.
freedom,
equal rights,
social justice and
solidarity is the value guideline of our political activity.
2. We are convinced that: the greatest value of society is a person,
his freedom
rights and responsibilities,
security,
quality of life,
health and
education.
This is why we stand for social justice,
equality of opportunity,
freedom of people and nations,
democracy,
peace
national security and
a sustainable environment, as it is the foundation of a dignified human life;
the main goal is to create a welfare state and a happy society.
This is possible by ensuring universally accessible and rapid economic, cultural, scientific and technological, educational, health care and environmental progress.
the most important priority is investment in people.
To the education and training of all people, especially young people, creating good living and working conditions here in Lithuania.
3. Taking into account the economic, geopolitical, social and technological changes taking place in the world and the formation of an intelligent society,
for full democracy,
in the safety of every person's life
in solidarity and
in a just state, we stand for:
human and nature-friendly development;
ensuring health protection for all;
effective and timely social assistance;
the development of a creative and intelligent society;
effective use of modern technologies in solving public, social and economic challenges;
general population employment;
ensuring national security by all necessary means;
preservation and nurturing of national and cultural identity.
4. We offer Lithuania a political, economic, social and cultural democracy based on social democratic values,
because only with the totality of these forms of democracy is it possible to create a state of social welfare for all, a safe, solidary and happy society.
5. Social democrats adhere to the position that basic human rights and freedoms are natural.
No person may be humiliated or discriminated against or given privileges because of his sex, race, nationality, language, origin, social status, faith, beliefs or views.
6. Man lives in unity with the environment and society, affects them and is affected by them.
His personal dignity and freedom of choice are better manifested when he is socially protected and provided for.
Every democratic system must constantly look for solutions that help create conditions for people to be materially self-sufficient, prevent the humiliation of human dignity, and promote the realization of their potential.
7. Social democrats adhere to the position that human moral freedom is the most important value.
A materially and spiritually independent person can develop his abilities, express his free choice.
Individual freedom is incompatible with the promotion of dictatorship, totalitarianism, religious fundamentalism, radical nationalism or xenophobia.
8. The main task of the social democrats' economic, social and cultural policy is to create conditions for people's abilities to unfold and to use them to create common social welfare and to satisfy individual needs.
Social justice requires removing any kind of discrimination against a person, helping a person with physical, mental or social difficulties.
Equality of opportunity recognizes the value of all people and is a fundamental condition for personal expression.
9. The principle of competition expressing market relations must be complemented by the principle of solidarity.
Solidarity is a way to insure against negative factors and an opportunity to ensure effective protection of personal rights through social dialogue.
Solidarity implementation measures include tax and financial system levers, market regulation mechanisms for social welfare needs, social policy instruments and others.
Social Democrats advocate a socially oriented market economy, but not a market society.
This is what makes us different from right-wing parties.
We strive for a balance between individuality and community, competition and solidarity, freedom and responsibility.
10. Freedom, social justice, security, solidarity and tolerance are fully revealed when they complement and enrich each other.
Freedom without equal opportunities degenerates into privilege.
The indiscriminate implementation of the principle of equality without the development of the individual and ensuring freedom ends in coercion and dictatorship.
Where the principles of freedom and justice are implemented without the solidarity of people, a society corresponding to their dignity is not created.
11. The diversity of forms of ownership enables the best satisfaction of the complex needs of the state and society.
Private, state, municipal, cooperative, community property can serve in providing necessary public services.
For social democrats, it is obvious that the competitive forces of the market can obey the goals of society: universal employment,
for fairer redistribution,
for nature- and man-friendly development.
Competitive antagonism can and must be replaced by competitive cooperation and cooperation.
12. Social Democrats adhere to the position that the state must act transparently, efficiently and professionally,
and high people's trust in state institutions is one of the fundamental aspirations of social democrats.
Responsible functioning of the government is the best guarantee of social stability.
Ensuring the public goods enshrined in the Constitution - education, science, health protection and social care - is the primary concern of the rule of law.
13. The path of democratic reforms is long, but it is the only way to ensure the sustainable development of the state.
In modern society, everything is so closely interconnected that reform is the only democratic way of changing social phenomena.
Reform always preserves the possibility of adjustment, improvement and social compromise and ensures the right of the minority to defend its opinion.
14. Social democracy is a movement for prosperity, freedom, social justice and peace.
It is a movement for a higher form of democracy - a safe, solidary and happy society, with the aim of improving living conditions for everyone and everything.
15. Clearly formulated and understandable rights, duties and responsibilities for everyone (people, government, business, media, trade unions, non-governmental organizations) will create a new social cohesion of our society
and will enable everyone to participate, contribute to the creation of wealth and benefit from the growth of public goods.
16. Society needs progressive political forces, determined to achieve a welfare state and a safe, solidary and happy society and not deviating from this path.
Only with long-term goals can effective measures be developed to implement new political aspirations.
We - social democrats - present such a decisive plan in this program.
II. OUR ESSENTIAL GOALS FOR THE SUCCESS OF LITHUANIA
Working Lithuania
17. The values ​​and actions of social democrats arise from the ethical attitude that the goal can only be a person.
Material wealth and production are only a means to create human well-being.
Our goal is full employment, when a person who has been dismissed from work is given the conditions and assistance to get back into work within a reasonable period of time.
Lithuania must make use of the talents and skills of each person and develop and improve them.
This is Lithuania's path towards prosperity for all and a happier society.
High quality employment must be ensured.
The Social Democrats undertake to create and implement a program of work for the entire society, which, when implemented, would ensure the supply and demand of high-quality and efficient jobs in the state,
movement of persons between professions
and the training of specialists needed by the state.
A stable welfare state is not possible without full employment.
The dynamism of the labor market must be increased through the use of social dialogue, job security and promotion support measures in all periods of a person's working career.
18. The Social Democrats will pay particular attention to the youth.
Quality and affordable education,
support programs for starting an independent life,
affordable first home,
guaranteed jobs,
compatibility of family and work, this is our guarantee for young people.
19. There must be enough space in the labor market for both the young and the old, whose experience is very much needed by the youth.
Therefore, seniors must be given the conditions to work and realize themselves without any age discrimination.
20. Creative and quality work is the main value and source of well-being.
Lithuania must become a country of productive and quality work, whose residents should not have to look for work abroad.
As a result, it is necessary to support the creation of high-quality, high-productivity jobs in every possible way,
upgrading and retraining,
lifelong learning in order to achieve the highest possible employment of the population.
A person has the right to actively participate in social life and the work process.
Its responsibility is to take advantage of the opportunities provided by training and professional development programs and the development of human and social resources.
His responsibility is to be a participant in social progress.
21. Labor income must guarantee funds necessary for a dignified life.
We will guarantee that a working person does not fall into poverty.
For this reason, we are committed to promoting the creation of jobs with high added value,
conclusion of collective agreements on labor remuneration and
to improve the system of payment of work of budget officers.
22. Social dialogue and partnership - a means to achieve more efficient production or equally share the burden of difficulties between business and work.
Trade unions and employers' organizations in Lithuania will work together to be able to implement changes and satisfy the interests of both employees and businesses.
The government will also be involved in this process.
Social dialogue and cooperation with employers' organizations and trade unions is one of the most important tasks in ensuring people's rights, increasing employment, improving the quality of work and ensuring social peace.
23. Business promotion alone will not create conditions for sustainable growth of the national economy.
An active employment and human resources development policy is necessary,
so that every person in our country who is willing and able to work can acquire the necessary skills and find a place to apply them,
and the population's economic activity would increase.
We are in favor of such state social policy, the priority of which is the employment of people.
Affordable and quality education
24. Social Democrats take the position that investments in people are the most important way of developing social welfare,
and education and lifelong learning are the engine of societal progress.
The state must constantly invest in deepening people's skills and knowledge.
Encouraging creativity can ensure the progress of a country.
Lithuania must become a country of creative and knowledge society.
25. Developing the creativity of children and young people will create the prerequisites for the formation of a creative middle layer of society in Lithuania.
We are convinced that the essential force of Lithuania's progress must not be the consumer, but the creative middle class of our society.
26. One of the cornerstones of an educated and cultured society is a harmonious family that takes care of children,
for which the state provides the most favorable conditions for raising children and raising them.
For this reason, social democrats unequivocally support a thoughtful family policy,
the desire to combine raising children with work
and the need to consistently increase investments in this area.
27. In order to achieve quality education, we will first reform all pre-university education.
Lithuanian children deserve to study in 21st century schools taught by 21st century teachers.
To achieve this goal, it is necessary to implement three tasks - to effectively reorganize the school network,
reform teacher training and
ensure an increase in the salaries of sign teachers.
The Social Democrats are committed to fundamental changes in this area.
28. We will implement the concept of a young person's "beginning of life", which would ensure the smoothest possible transition from education in secondary schools to higher education studies,
entering the labor market,
creating a family.
We will constantly conduct research on the situation of young people.
We will create programs that promote the development of the values ​​of citizenship and social solidarity.
29. In today's dynamic world, the country's ability to change is the main condition for the state's survival and development.
Developing the ability to change is possible only in the presence of a modern science and technology policy of the country.
Science and new technologies, deep knowledge, competence of people and institutions are the basis of a promising economy and a strong economy.
The driving force behind the transfer of technology and innovation is the cooperation between universities, scientists and researchers, industry and commercial enterprises.
30. Digital solutions expand the learning process, giving it a completely new qualitative level.
The integration and use of these technologies can make the education and training process more engaging, interesting and accessible to all.
The Social Democrats will ensure the state's continuous investments in the technological development of the education system and the utilization of new technological tools and their possibilities in the education system and cultural life of the country.
31. The digitization processes that have begun show a particularly high demand for specialists in this specialization, which will grow in the future.
Lithuania must take care of the future of its population and improve their opportunities for employment, development and payment.
In order to achieve this goal, the state must pay great attention to the training of specialists who will be able to realize themselves in this field.
We must promote changes in the education system that would allow Lithuania to train the right amount of necessary specialists.
Also, understanding the changes in the labor market, we must create suitable conditions for people who want to retrain and create conditions for the integration of these specialists.
32. We will nurture our cultural values.
We will ensure that the awareness of our national identity is matured,
the Lithuanian language and ethnic culture are nurtured,
guaranteed quality and dissemination of professional art,
the cultural heritage of our nation is protected.
We will create a new cultural policy model, which will name the state's obligations in the field of culture, and determine the instruments for the development of this field.
33. We will develop a full-fledged and tolerant cultural environment that connects each of us with the history, traditions, and inherited cultural values ​​of our place of residence.
An innovative and growing economy
34. Social Democrats will ensure business stability,
fair and transparent competitive environment
and will strive for business to feel the obligation to shape the state's finances, to support the aspirations of full employment.
Businesses must take responsibility to help employees improve their qualifications, to participate socially in the development process of society.
35. It is necessary to combine the competition of producers and the cooperation of social partners and institutions.
It unites and solidifies all residents.
The competition of companies must grow together with cohesion and social justice for the population.
Competition is necessary, but it must be fair, transparent, ensuring innovation, lower prices and higher quality jobs for people.
36. The goal of Lithuania must be the development of applied scientific research, which can significantly contribute to economic growth,
therefore, the government must constantly pay more attention and support to such research.
37. Lithuania is a part of one of the largest markets in the world - the European Union - and we are in contact with third countries as part of the common policy of Union members.
Working together with other member states, we must ensure that the competition and profit-seeking of producers do not destroy social security, do not violate workers' rights, and do not worsen working conditions.
38. We will encourage all the progressive forces of Lithuanian society, the creative middle class to unite their efforts in creating a Lithuania of new social opportunities, open to innovation, defending fair competition in business, encouraging cooperation between business entities, more educated, more solidary and fairer.
39. We will implement such measures so that the results of a growing economy are felt by everyone,
the differences in the standard of living between rich and poor people would decrease,
the quality of life of every person would improve.
We believe that progressive tax policy should be aimed at creating people's social welfare and reducing social exclusion.
40. We will support cooperation between the state and business in order to encourage investments, implement new efficient technologies, and protect the environment.
We will strive to strengthen the business orientation towards activities whose results are directed not only to the pursuit of profit, but also to areas such as human rights, environmental protection, social solidarity and cohesion.
Responsible business, corporate social responsibility is an essential condition for sustainable development.
41. The goal of our economic policy is to accelerate the development of the Lithuanian economy, which is based on high technologies and knowledge- and innovation-intensive production,
create new jobs,
increase the country's competitive opportunities in the global market,
implement the principles of strategic planning in the preparation of long-term economic programs.
42. New generation technologies are developing very quickly and digital markets are extremely dynamic.
Therefore, Lithuania needs close cooperation between scientists, entrepreneurs, specialists and users of these services in this field.
The state must create and develop this dialogue, which is necessary for Lithuania's technological progress and progress, by establishing and supporting various forms of such cooperation.
New generation, green, bio and nano technologies must ensure the development of innovative jobs.
43. An increasingly digitized world provides new economic opportunities for our country and its people.
New markets are being created and expanded in which every citizen can economically participate.
Lithuania, having limited natural resources, must take advantage of this opportunity.
Therefore, we will pay great attention to public and business education about new opportunities in the information technology sector and digital markets.
Taking into account the needs dictated by the dynamic and global market, we will create suitable conditions for the creation and development of such a business.
44. Small and medium-sized businesses are an important tool for reducing unemployment and ensuring the entrepreneurship of the population.
We are convinced that funds for small and medium-sized entrepreneurs must be channeled through business development programs with more economical administration of funds management;
counseling and training of entrepreneurs is encouraged.
Cooperation is a necessary condition for small and medium-sized businesses to survive and develop in conditions of increasing competition.
For this reason, social democrats will initiate, organize, promote and support the establishment of cooperatives and their development.
45. In developing the protection of consumer rights, we encourage non-governmental organizations for the protection of consumer rights to cooperate with state institutions for the protection of consumer rights and quality control.
We defend the independence of control and audit institutions from the pressure of interest groups,
we take measures to protect the Lithuanian market from unfair competition, using generally recognized and legally established anti-dumping, protective and other market protection measures.
Sustainable regional development and rural perspective
46. ​​The Social Democrats undertake to support sustainable rural development, which would be ensured by strengthening the competitiveness of farms, organizing food chains and risk management, knowledge transfer and innovation, restoring, preserving and improving ecosystems, using renewable resources and adapting to climate change.
47. The goal of the Social Democrats is to modernize life in the countryside, as well as create better working conditions for farmers.
We are committed to ensuring that farmers are properly compensated for their work.
The state must contribute to the creation of better living conditions in the countryside.
Strengthening local self-government and the activities of communities is an important condition for the development of our state.
We are committed to promoting regional economic diversification by ensuring that a large proportion of jobs in them do not depend on the agricultural sector.
48. We stand for competitive agriculture and rural development regulated by equal partnership relations,
improving the quality of life in rural areas
and expansion of economic and social activities,
self-government of agricultural organizations and communities of rural residents.
All legal and economic means and methods must be used to encourage and support family commodity farms, which would be the basis of farming and rural lifestyle in the future.
49. We will strengthen the youth employment policy in the regions,
paying particular attention to the inclusion of young people with fewer opportunities in the regional labor market.
We will encourage the migration of young specialists to Lithuanian municipalities further away from the big cities, thus creating a coherent regional development policy in Lithuania and reducing the social and economic divide between different regions of Lithuania.
50. Social-democratic regional policy is based on the provisions that it is necessary to expand and mobilize state support for problem regions not only by providing preferential loans or loan guarantees for business projects, tax exemptions, but also in financial or other forms of subsidies, financing selected infrastructural and social projects;
when applying structural development regulatory levers, use clear, quantitatively defined criteria for distinguishing the most problematic regions.
According to those criteria, it is necessary to seek international and provide Government support for regions recognized as problematic.
51. We, social democrats, undertake to create and implement an agricultural and rural development strategy that would achieve more efficient use of local genetic resources,
the development of the fruit, berry and vegetable sectors is encouraged,
natural poultry breeding, rabbit breeding, sheep and goat breeding, beef cattle breeding are developed,
the preservation of endangered plant and animal species is ensured,
organic farms are being developed.
We will create favorable conditions for cooperation in the processing of primary agricultural production
and we will develop a specialized cooperative in agriculture.
Socially protected society
52. The priority of social democrats is a solidary and socially protected society where it is good and safe to live, work, create families, give birth and raise children.
A full-fledged life of the people of Lithuania must be ensured by productive work,
and for those unable to work, social protection is based on the principle of social solidarity.
53. One of the main tasks of social democrats is the solution of demographic problems, because the increase in the population is the main condition for the survival of the nation.
For this reason, we will encourage birth rates by supporting families.
We want the country's population not to decrease, but to increase,
so that families are willing and able to maintain and properly educate as many children as possible.
We are for the kind of family that people raising children today want.
We are convinced that the birth of children should not reduce the family's income, limit both parents' professional aspirations, education, career achievements, their cultural interests and quality of life.
As a result, we will continue to expand universal support for every child (benefits, free meals, increasing the tax-free minimum income, etc.).
We will increase childcare benefits.
We will make it possible for both parents to work, ensuring that their young children receive adequate care in preschool institutions.
54. Good quality and affordable childcare is the 21st century. The necessity of Lithuanian families.
Long-term childcare leave cannot be the only state tool to encourage birth.
Childcare should give children the best possible start in education, freedom for parents to find employment, create jobs and integrate families into the community.
High-quality nurseries and kindergartens create the foundations for integration into the community and start the process of formal education.
Adequate childcare enables parents to better engage in work activities, reduces inequality between women and men, and is one of the measures to reduce child poverty.
We will create conditions so that as many children in need of care as possible find the warmth of home in new families, families, and community centers.
55. State support for the family and good conditions for raising children are the guarantor of Lithuania's future.
We must ensure that all children have equal opportunities to get a proper education and build their future, regardless of their social status,
to support needy families in every possible way and expand their opportunities to get out of poverty.
We adhere to the position that children's education is a family matter, for which the state must create the most favorable conditions.
56. Although there are many non-governmental youth organizations operating in our society, a large part of the youth does not participate in any social activities.
A number of young people have a negative view of public and political activities and ignore elections to democratic institutions.
For these reasons, youth employment through non-governmental organizations, non-formal education and other civic activities will be a priority of the social democrats.
57. Young people are emerging personalities for whom it is especially important to create all the conditions for learning, to get involved in the development of a creative society, in the lifelong learning system, to enter the labor market, to start a family.
An active state youth employment, training and education policy must become one of the most important priorities for the creation of social well-being.
58. We will promote the creation of youth centers, where as many young people as possible can find a favorable space for themselves.
We will review youth summer recreation programs.
We will pay special attention to the youth belonging to unorganized and informal groups, offering them acceptable activities to increase employment.
59. Society must properly take care of those who have contributed to the country's prosperity and prosperity through their work.
After completing active work, a person must feel like a full-fledged citizen of the country, have a material basis, not experience social exclusion and actively participate in society.
A well-off old age is a sign of a stable society.
We will ensure that old-age pensions are never reduced and consistently increase with the growth of the state's economy.
We will expand the opportunities for seniors to actively participate in the cultural, social and civic life of Lithuania.
60. The quality of life of a large part of Lithuanian people depends on the social insurance system.
We will increase the sustainability, security and adequacy of this system.
State social insurance must remain the basis of social insurance, but people must be able to contribute to their pensions through savings and occupational funds.
We will only take decisions on delaying the retirement age after responsibly examining people's opportunities to work longer.
61. Social solidarity is one of the essential aspirations of social democratic politics.
Reducing economic inequality is our goal.
The main tool to achieve this goal is income redistribution, and the main tool is a progressive tax policy.
Tax evasion, avoidance and fraud must be tackled.
Only after achieving greater redistribution of income through the budget will the state be able to ensure equal opportunities for its residents.
62. The social security provided by the state must ensure the funds necessary for a decent living for all citizens
and additional services for those persons who, due to old age, disability, death of relatives, guardianship, illness, maternity (paternity), unemployment, lose income and cannot provide enough for themselves or their family.
We will not allow working people who have lost their jobs and are trying to return to work to be humiliated with benefits that are not enough to live on.
The fight against the abuse of social guarantees cannot be a reason not to defend the rights of honest people who find themselves in a difficult life situation.
63. Being a disabled person in Lithuania is still a challenge.
The Lithuanian Social Democratic Party advocates a full and dignified life for disabled people.
Therefore, both the Government and municipalities must carry out the transformation of large care institutions faster, cooperate more closely with non-governmental organizations and communities.
The non-governmental sector is capable of providing social services, so social democrats will include these organizations in the general system of social services.
We will ensure that disabled people in Lithuania have the best possible living conditions.
All public spaces - both closed and open - and businesses that serve customers must ensure that a disabled person can freely enter and receive the services he needs without the help of third parties.
64. Social Democrats will pay special attention to children with disabilities or special needs.
Favorable conditions will be ensured for their development and becoming full-fledged members of society, not dependents of the state.
We will strive to make the state social integration programs focus on children with disabilities.
A healthy person in a healthy environment
65. Health today is understood as the social, physical and spiritual well-being of a person, not just the absence of disease.
In order to be healthy, you need good living conditions, a safe work and living and recreation environment, and healthy nutrition.
In order to implement these requirements in Lithuania, a comprehensive health policy is necessary.
It should include health promotion, education, safety, early disease prevention, timely and accurate diagnosis, qualified treatment and rehabilitation.
66. The national health system must be improved in Lithuania.
Along with personal health assistance, it must also include an effective public health care system - diseases and unhealthy causes would not only be clarified, but also prevented from occurring.
67. Funds allocated to the Lithuanian health sector are not used efficiently.
We are one of the leaders in Europe in terms of the ratio of the number of beds to the population, which does not allow the mandatory health insurance funds to be directed to increasing the salaries of medical workers and the availability of treatment facilities for the population.
The goal of the Social Democrats is to achieve an optimal network of medical facilities and efficient medical facility services.
68. An appropriate health care system that is accessible to all and sensitive to the patient, protecting the greatest value of every person - health, is a sign of a modern and responsible state and a matter of honor.
Prevention of diseases, early diagnosis of diseases and properly organized public health activities help people live longer, feel safe, detect and overcome diseases and health disorders in time.
69. It is necessary to ensure responsibility and compensation for health damage due to bad treatment, harmful environment or lack of information about it.
Every person must be interested in protecting and strengthening their health, taking care of a healthy living environment.
70. Necessary medical assistance must be provided free of charge in all medical institutions.
It must be acceptable and accessible to the public.
The services of medical institutions provided to patients must be adequately financed by the state (municipalities), health insurance or privately.
Dental care must be free of charge for young people studying, and affordable for everyone else.
Preventive health care for schoolchildren must be ensured in schools.
71. We undertake to pay special attention to the fight against drunkenness at the state and municipal level,
to develop the infrastructure for active rest and recreation of residents, playgrounds, health trails, recreational and other purpose objects
and signs fostering cultural memory.
72. We will create legal and economic conditions for the rapid development of universal sports clubs as primary subjects of the national physical education and sports system,
we will encourage their contribution to the physical education of children and youth and health promotion.
We will promote non-professional sports as a form of youth employment by creating the necessary infrastructure.
73. A healthy environment is the main condition for a person to be healthy.
For this reason, the Lithuanian Social Democratic Party will pay particular attention to the rational use of natural resources,
To ensure the stability of ecosystems,
for consistent reduction of environmental pollution.
Our priority is a healthy, clean and safe environment that harmoniously meets the needs of society, the environment and the economy.
74. Social Democrats are for sustainable development, cyclical economy, bioeconomy and biotechnology,
organic farming,
energy from renewable resources, waste-free and low-waste technologies,
environment and nature protection.
We are and will be committed to the development of an environmentally friendly sustainable industry by all means
and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
75. Smart solutions and a smart economy make it possible to reduce environmental pollution by minimizing the negative impact of human activities on nature.
With the help of these smart tools, we can create healthier and more environmentally friendly cities, communities and organize human activities in such a way that we do as little damage to nature as possible.
Therefore, we must implement, support and promote the use of smart technologies that protect the environment in state management and people's daily lives.
76. The energy perspective outlined by the Social Democrats - increasing the efficiency of energy consumption,
development of own power generation capacity (primarily, energy from renewable resources),
modernization and development of hydroaccumulation,
development of distributed (decentralized) electricity generation and storage,
smart electricity grids, development of biofuel and biomass cogeneration,
installation of energy from renewable resources in buildings.
77. A solidary society includes not only solidarity between people, but also the protection of the rights of the animals that live next to us.
We will ensure the protection of the rights of domestic animals and the inevitable responsibility of those who torture them, and we will actively and consistently fight against poaching.
Close ties with Lithuanians of the world and solidarity with people of all nationalities
78. Lithuania's demographic situation – the consistently worsening ratio of working people to people of non-working age – requires urgent state decisions regarding the return of emigrants to Lithuania.
The Social Democrats undertake to create and implement a systematic state program based on economic, social, educational and other promotion measures, which would allow to ensure the return of a significant part of emigrants of working age to Lithuania.
All necessary state resources must be used for this, because if we do not stabilize the demographic situation, we will not avoid enormous economic and social problems.
79. The Social Democrats hold the unequivocal position that every Lithuanian, regardless of whether he has acquired the citizenship of another state, must have the right to preserve Lithuanian citizenship.
We will consistently strive to enshrine this principle in the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Lithuania.
80. Lithuanian communities abroad, youth unions and other foreign Lithuanian organizations are cradles of Lithuanianness all over the world.
The Lithuanian Social Democratic Party undertakes to support them in every possible way, ensuring that their activities, which help to maintain the connection of the Lithuanian diaspora with the Motherland, will not be interrupted and will be strengthened.
81. The Social Democrats are convinced that maintaining and developing Lithuanian schools in foreign countries is one of the key tasks in order to preserve the national identity of the Lithuanian diaspora.
82. The Social Democrats undertake to ensure mutual communication between Lithuanians living abroad and Lithuania in order to maintain the interest of these people in Lithuania and its life and
to encourage them to contribute with their good experience in creating the well-being of their Homeland.
The Lithuanian government must implement and develop e-democracy instruments,
including online voting, which would enable Lithuanians living far from Lithuania to be a part of this country.
83. The Social Democrats are convinced that in order to ensure the connection of the Lithuanian diaspora with the Motherland and to maintain their trust in Lithuania, Lithuania must provide efficient consular services to its citizens, both living and working, and those visiting abroad.
84. The Social Democrats recognize that emigration from Lithuania is not determined solely by the state's economic indicators.
The general atmosphere of freedom, tolerance and solidarity in the state is no less important.
In order to prevent people from Lithuania from moving to other countries, Lithuania must make every effort to become a full-fledged democratic and advanced state not only in economic, but also in legal and cultural aspects.
85. The national revival in Lithuania encouraged the revival of other Lithuanian national communities.
Many movements and groups appeared that supported the revival of national values, cultural and educational activities.
However, national communities often functioned in a closed manner, covering only their own national groups or part of them.
The closedness and passivity of the national communities was partly caused by insufficiently clear and targeted state policy in this area.
86. The position of the Social Democrats in relation to national communities is clear.
We stand for a state that guarantees equal political, economic, social and cultural rights and freedoms to its citizens, regardless of their nationality or worldview.
We recognize the society that protects the national identity of citizens, the continuity of culture, we promote national self-awareness and its self-expression, cultural prosperity.
87. The Social Democrats aim to ensure the opportunities for ethnic communities living in Lithuania to: fully integrate into the social, political, economic and cultural life of the state;
to nurture and develop their national cultural traditions;
use and learn the native language, publish newspapers in the native language, have their own radio and television programs;
to publicly and freely express one's opinion on all community-related issues, to join public cultural organizations;
engage in creative, literary, educational activities in their native language, maintain relations with their native countries;
to establish galleries, museums, houses, clubs, memorial sites or in other forms to accumulate, nurture, promote the cultural values ​​of national communities, to establish funds to support cultural and public activities;
to ensure state protection and protection of important monuments of culture, architecture and history of national communities;
learn the official language;
to profess one's religion.
88. Respecting existing differences and building on common European values ​​is an example of positive integration.
Migration must be managed within countries without forgetting to help fight poverty and conflict in neighboring countries.
Economic migration must be associated with the strengthening of social integrity and cultural national identity.
Human rights and freedoms are guaranteed
89. The rule of law is based on the rule of law principle.
State laws and supervision of their implementation must realistically ensure human rights and freedoms and an accessible mechanism for their protection.
Only by knowing their rights can people defend them, which is why universally accessible legal education is necessary.
Quality legal aid must reach everyone who needs it in order to defend their violated rights and freedoms.
90. All people are equal, regardless of their gender, race, nationality, language, origin, social status, faith, beliefs, views and other bases provided for in the international treaties or laws of the Republic of Lithuania.
The Lithuanian Social Democratic Party strongly opposes discrimination and incitement to hatred.
We will improve legislation to help fight hate crimes without denying freedom of speech as one of the most important rights in a democratic state.
The diversity of Lithuania's population is the strength of a modern country.
People should not be discriminated against from birth.
The state must take responsibility for a happy and safe childhood without discrimination.
91. Ensuring gender equality remains one of the biggest challenges, which becomes an obstacle to ensuring equality of opportunities for all Lithuanian residents, and hinders the economic and social progress of society.
In order to ensure the harmonious development of the state, Lithuanian social democrats advocate consistent implementation of the principle of gender equality in society and in the family.
92. The duty of the social democratic state is not only to ensure that people's rights are inviolable,
but also to guarantee their positive rights - the right to healthy food, the right to housing, the right to quality and affordable education, the right to health care, the right to social security, the right to work.
The Lithuanian Social Democratic Party considers the establishment of the inseparability of these rights from other human rights as its goals.
93. Domestic violence is a crime that cripples people's lives and causes great economic and moral damage to society.
We will use complex measures to ensure the safety of the victims, the responsibility of the perpetrators and the prevention of crimes.
94. We are of the opinion that the availability of legal aid cannot depend only on a person's income and wealth.
Quality legal aid must reach everyone who needs it in order to defend their violated rights and freedoms.
95. A democratic state must guarantee to each of its inhabitants the right to freely profess the religion of his choice or not to profess any religion.
At the same time, Lithuania, being a legal secular state, must cooperate with religious communities, but it must ensure that no religious community is given exceptional conditions to influence the decisions made by the state and municipal authorities.
96. The state must ensure all the constitutional rights of individuals,
to protect public order and public order,
to prevent possible crimes and other violations of the law,
carefully study them, reveal them,
to provide residents with legal assistance.
For the benefit of society itself, it is necessary to harmonize the functions of municipalities and the police in ensuring public order and public safety,
improve the selection of police officers for service, their training, professional qualifications,
for the police to actively cooperate with non-governmental organizations and residents.
Lithuania's future is safe and secure
97. The Social Democrats adhere to the position that effective and consistent foreign policy of Lithuania must be based on the principles of solidary cooperation between democratic states, support of good neighborly relations, supremacy of international law, respect for human rights and freedoms.
The main goal of Lithuania's foreign policy is to adequately protect the independence of the state, adequately responding to threats arising in the region and the world, while ensuring the successful economic and social development of the state.
98. A strong and united European Union continues to be the most important factor in Europe's political, economic and social development.
Preservation of the internal solidarity and unity of the EU, the stability of the eurozone and economic growth are long-term and essential interests of Lithuania.
99. The goal of national security is to achieve the elimination or reduction to a minimum of all possible threats to the people of Lithuania and the state.
Those threats can be political, economic, military, social, cultural, ecological and others.
Man and the state are insecure due to political instability, economic decline, social tension, weakening of national identity, natural pollution, increasing crime, threats posed by hostile military, power structures, and the threat of terrorism.
It is necessary to assess and respond accordingly to new threats to energy, information, cyber and other security.
The national security policy must include all of these issues, take into account the entire complex of threats, and for this it is necessary to unambiguously ensure European and transatlantic integration.
100. Based on such a systemic concept of national security, we realize that national security is ensured by many means.
When implementing our domestic and foreign policy, we must understand that we will ensure the security of the state and society only after successfully implementing our economic, social, cultural, and ecological goals, and we undertake to do so.
101. The Social Democrats will continue the modernization of the Lithuanian army,
volunteer support,
we will pay special attention to the combat training of soldiers
and improving service conditions and military infrastructure to make military service attractive.
It is necessary to maintain an optimal number of military units,
increase the staffing of military units,
carry out the acquisition of modern weaponry,
build a modern, well-armed and allied military.
Strengthen host country support for allies.
We will ensure that the Lithuanian army consistently strengthens relations with society.
If necessary, help civil institutions provide support to people in natural disasters and other extreme cases,
would rally citizens for universal resistance against any aggressor.
The Lithuanian army will help the family, school and public organizations to patriotically educate young people, together with the National Defense Volunteer Forces and the Rifle Association will promote citizens' determination to defend the Motherland and the country's freedom in new ways.
102. Good relations with friendly neighboring states must be developed through real actions.
We must cooperate closely with neighboring countries with which we share common democratic values, history and culture or interests.
This determines the security of the country, its social and economic well-being and development.
The Social Democrats will continue to work consistently to strengthen the unity and cooperation of the Baltic states,
will strengthen political and economic ties between the Baltic and Scandinavian countries,
will develop and activate the dialogue with Poland on strategic issues for both countries.
103. Together with our partners, we will use diplomatic means to ensure that the problems arising in the countries of the Eastern Partnership are solved by means suitable for the 21st century and based on respect for international law, respecting the integrity, sovereignty and right of the states to choose defense, political and economic organizations.
104. The main goal of the policy towards Russia is to encourage this important Lithuanian village to abandon the use of force, military aggression and other illegal actions in international politics,
return to respect for the norms and principles of international law and repair the damage done to the international security architecture and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighboring countries,
and consistently implement the principles of democracy and the rule of law in domestic politics and respect basic human rights and freedoms.
105. With the expansion of the European Union and the unification of Europe, parliamentary diplomacy acquires a particularly important role next to the traditional diplomacy of states.
The joint efforts of national parliaments and members of the European Parliament to achieve strong peace, sustainable development and good neighborhood are a solid basis for achieving the goals of the European Union's common foreign and security policy and European security and defense policy.
We strongly advocate strengthening the role of national parliaments in the European Union and developing parliamentary diplomacy in the implementation of the EU policy agenda.
106. Social Democrats are convinced that energy security is a particularly important element of political and economic independence.
Lithuania must be active in strengthening the external dimension of the common EU energy policy and a unified coordinated dialogue with third countries.
107. In the light of new security challenges, NATO remains the only collective defense system that ensures crisis prevention, deterrence of possible aggressions, peacekeeping missions and collective defense in cases of possible attacks.
We have no doubt that NATO must change in response to expansion and new threats.
In the NATO format, it is mandatory to seek consensus with the allies.
NATO provides its members with strong security guarantees.
Lithuania must ensure the defense readiness of adequate power
and to achieve as soon as possible the implementation of the defense financing commitments entered into with this organization.
The fundamental interest of Lithuania is to strengthen relations between the European Union and the United States by all means
and to expand the strategic cooperation between Lithuania and the USA, especially in the fields of military security, energy and economy,
to seek the direct presence of US military forces in the Baltic and Central European states.
108. The economic dimension of foreign policy plays an increasingly important role in Lithuanian foreign policy.
The development of economic diplomacy forms a business-friendly environment abroad.
We will be active in helping businesses to expand their export markets, analyzing and offering new opportunities, studying market reliability and predictability.
We will organize business missions in promising markets, we will look for new, efficient forms of work.
Open and accountable government
109. The principle of a democratic society - it is not the government that gives people rights and freedoms, but voters give the government the authority to protect human rights and freedoms.
Only following this principle, democratic relations are directly connected with responsibility to society.
110. Progress is the engine of state development, and the participation of Lithuanian people in democratic processes is an invaluable value that needs to be strengthened and nurtured.
Modern information technologies make it possible to create platforms, thanks to which citizens can more easily get involved in state management at various stages of these processes - from submitting proposals to participating in elections.
Ensuring and developing democracy requires broad citizen involvement in policy making and implementation.
Therefore, we will encourage the development and implementation of technological solutions that will ensure and promote the implementation of the civil and political rights of the citizens of Lithuania,
we will seek to introduce online voting in elections and referenda at all levels.
111. After implementing direct mayoral elections, we will continue to strive to democratize the procedures for appointing government representatives and to reform decision-making so that it meets the principles of democracy, transparency and legality, as well as the expectations of the people of Lithuania.
112. By using the opportunities provided by smart technologies, significant progress can be achieved in order to make state management efficient and transparent,
therefore, we advocate the wide use of these information technologies in the organization and implementation of state management at all stages of these processes.
113. Government transparency can only be achieved through its openness.
We will consistently strive for the state to continuously invest in opening up data while ensuring the protection of personal data.
This will provide opportunities for citizens and non-governmental organizations to constantly monitor government activities and decisions.
114. With the help of information technology, the state can more easily solve social, economic, public order and other challenges arising in society.
With the help of software, these problems can be solved not only by achieving the set goal, but also by promoting community and solidarity.
The state must create an environment in which such solutions can be created and encourage the use of already created measures.
115. Gatherings of citizens into non-governmental organizations and other associations serving their interests provide excellent conditions for the formation of civil society.
The network of non-governmental organizations enables the implementation of constitutional human rights in society and helps the development of democracy.
Non-governmental organizations and their associations must acquire more rights when deciding issues of self-government or national importance.
116. The Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania establishes local self-government as an independent form of exercise of power.
Civil (open) society and the existence of self-government institutions are the main characteristics of the rule of law.
Self-government is the right of a united society and the opportunity to act through independent, self-acting and public-controlled local government institutions, to regulate public affairs and ensure the implementation of human rights and freedoms.
Local government bodies must have full freedom of action and initiative to fulfill the public obligations entrusted to them by the voters.
117. Communities of villages, towns, cities, streets or districts are constantly being created in Lithuania today.
They complement the democratic possibilities of the self-governing community.
As a result, it is particularly important to give such communities the right to actively participate in solving issues relevant to them, enshrining it legally, and defining their cooperation with municipal councils.
It is important to carry out further self-government reform so that viable self-government administrative territories are formed in Lithuania.
The Lithuanian Social Democratic Party is capable of implementing this program.
It has a great experience of political and organizational activity, constantly renewing intellectual potential, many courageous and energetic members and like-minded people, in order to successfully realize the set goals, to respond to constantly emerging new challenges.
The new Lithuania is a prosperous welfare state, a safe, happy and solidary society, a free, equal and creative person.
This is a real vision of our future, this is the path proposed and chosen by the Lithuanian Social Democracy.
We believe that the program embodies the dreams and expectations of many generations and different sections of society.
