I AM A DEMOCRAT:
Because I don't need a bigger or smaller country, but a better one.
Because for me divisions are a thing of the past,
and the future wins.
Because economics must come before politics,
and the state before the individual.
Because I don't divide people by national, political, religious or any other affiliation.
Because I'm brave and I don't agree to blackmail.
Because I have a clear plan and a modern program.
Because I stand for a different, more modern and richer Montenegro.
Because I want people to come to Montenegro, not leave.
Because I speak the truth and keep my word.
Because I don't look for the culprits of failure in others, but in myself.
Because we need leadership and personnel renewal, because without new forces and new energy there is no success and no victory.
Because I will build new bridges of cooperation and tear down existing barricades and barriers.
Because I will not see people as competition, but as new energy.
Because I know that there is no promotion without merit, nor office without results;
Because I have the solutions and the energy to implement them.
Because I want us to agree on the work we need to do.
Because we are dedicated to Montenegro and its citizens,
and not with their own armchairs and pockets.
Because what I say, I do.
DEMOCRATS STAND FOR:
Contemporary way of political activity;
elimination of artificially produced divisions and reconciliation of Montenegro;
equal position of all citizens of Montenegro;
consistent respect for universal human rights and freedoms;
fight against all forms of discrimination;
rule of law;
equality,
economic and social security of citizens;
social justice, social solidarity and tolerance;
preservation and protection of the environment;
gender equality
and encouraging more active participation of women in social and political processes;
improvement of the position of young people and greater representation in decision-making positions;
strong political and legal fight against corruption and crime at all levels;
accelerated and sustainable economic and economic development of Montenegro;
balanced regional development, reduction of depopulation and population migration from underdeveloped areas to cities;
S protection of minority rights in accordance with international and European standards;
respect for diversity in terms of political belief, national and religious affiliation and gender of citizens;
international cooperation and encouraging close cooperation with countries in the region, Europe and the world;
improvement of health and social protection of all citizens;
greater investment in education;
with clean accounts and penalties for abuses;
ensuring respect for the right to free primary education;
ensuring respect for the right to work and based on work,
improvement of working and living conditions of workers;
protection of pensioners and the most vulnerable categories of the population;
faster integration of Montenegro into the EU;
decentralization in favor of municipalities, city municipalities, the Capital City and the Capital City;
protection of citizens' interests, interests of the state of Montenegro, its sovereignty and territorial integrity;
with the protection and improvement of the standard of living of workers, pensioners, peasants and all citizens who live from their own work;
an efficient, fair and accessible healthcare system;
starting production in factories and fighting the crisis;
red i rad;
reforms that must be implemented immediately;
with a happy and rich Montenegro.
Democrats keep their word!
RECONCILIATION NOW
Our task:
Montenegro - the state of free people.
Introduction:
Montenegro needs a new policy, new politicians, new energy, a modern program and ideas in order for it to become what it has long deserved.
- democratic
and a European state.
Montenegro does not need artificially produced divisions, nor false political morality, quarrels between politicians and hatred between citizens, because in this way we mercilessly waste the future of man and society as a whole.
Endless demagoguery, division, insults, compromise and running away from problems must be the politics of the past.
It is time to turn to a different policy and talk about investments
, more efficient and safer economy,
modern education,
strengthening competition
and creating better conditions for the life of all citizens of Montenegro.
It's time to start working.
Description of the condition:
One of the most successful mechanisms for manipulating and ruling the masses is to incite divisions along national, religious, political, status or other lines.
Equality in rights and obligations should be our primary goal and motive for complete social and political activity.
We must never again allow ourselves to be discriminated against and separated just because we used our natural right to feel as we want, to say what we think and to have a view of the world the way we think is right.
It is the vertical of existence and living of man as a free being.
We all need to gather around one single goal - a more successful, modern and wealthy Montenegro, so that all of us would be better off and have equal conditions for the life, progress and success of our children.
Insistence on artificially produced divisions must remain a policy of the past.
Such a policy did not bring good to Montenegro or its citizens, and it will not do the same for generations to come.
because the quasi-politics of division compromises not only the state as a unique organism,
but also man as a human being.
DEPOLITIZED MONTENEGRO
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Overcoming divisions on any basis;
z reconciliation and agreement with those who wish good for Montenegro and its citizens;
equal chances for everyone, regardless of which political option they advocated, how they declared themselves nationally, what language they spoke and what religion they belonged to;
eliminating politics from all educational institutions
and leaving education policy to the most capable and successful;
abolition of the practice of knowing the results of the competition in advance and giving chances to the most capable;
eliminating the policy of revanchism towards political dissenters;
establishment of a new rule: party to politicians, health to doctors, economy to experts, judiciary to competent, education to professors, better life for all citizens;
those who think differently will not be enemies, but controllers of the government;
the repressive state apparatus will be accountable to citizens and civil control bodies, not to party henchmen;
the language, history and culture of minorities and minority groups will be part of the history and culture of the whole of Montenegro.
The future begins with victories, not divisions.
MONTENEGRO IN EUROPE
Our task
Montenegro is the country of the European future!
Introduction:
The dilemma of whether the state should enter into some form of alliance with other states, in order to contribute to the very reasons for its creation,
which consist in the guarantee of its prosperity,
security and sustainability, is almost as old as the country itself.
Even during early history, immediately after the creation of the first states, many of them, for various reasons, decided to unite with, most often, their neighbors.
Later, the recipe "association for the betterment" was applied on all continents, which resulted in success much more often.
Thus, even today there are centuries-old state alliances, which have not only withstood the test of time, but are considered the most developed state or supranational creations in the world.
One of those, the truth - of recent date, to which Democratic Montenegro strongly aspires, is the European Union.
What is particularly important for citizens, and especially for young people, is that membership in the European Union provides opportunities for a life without borders.
This implies the free exchange of ideas and knowledge,
unhindered movement of people,
schooling,
employment under equal conditions in the member states of the European Union.
This is why it is important for Montenegro to join the community of European states,
but it is even more important that European values ​​take root in Montenegro.
The project of Montenegro's accession to the European Union must be reflected in the way of life, the standard of citizens, the construction and affirmation of social values ​​and the functioning of institutions.
Otherwise, if this does not happen, the now very pronounced support of citizens for Montenegro's accession to the European Union will inevitably decline.
Description of the condition:
The Stabilization and Association Agreement between Montenegro and the European Union entered into force in May 2010.
In December 2010, the European Council granted Montenegro the status of a candidate country.
Accession negotiations were opened in June 2012.
As part of the accession negotiations until the end of 2014, out of a total of 35 chapters, negotiations were opened in 16 chapters, including chapter 23 - justice and fundamental rights and chapter 24 - justice, freedom and equality.
In the meantime, two chapters of science and research and education and culture are temporarily closed.
The integration of Montenegro into the European Union, apart from being a strategic goal, for which, at least formally, almost all components of political and, in general, social life in our country are committed,
represents a constitutional category, since it was proclaimed in the preamble of the Constitution of Montenegro.
After the steps taken on that path, Montenegro today has the status of a candidate country for EU membership, with open accession negotiations.
Democratic Montenegro welcomes the emphasized persistence of our European partners on the necessity of a stronger effort by the government to fulfill the criteria from the chapter on the rule of law (23 - Judiciary and fundamental rights and 24 - Justice, freedom and security), which it considers a condition of all conditions that our country, finally, move forward, not underestimating the importance of other negotiating chapters.
MONTENEGRO A EUROPEAN COUNTRY
In the annual reports on the progress of Montenegro, as well as in the adopted resolutions on Montenegro, the European Commission and the European Parliament, in addition to noting certain progress in certain areas,
constantly point to the necessity of further work on the rule of law
and achieving measurable results in the fight against corruption and organized crime,
ensuring an independent judiciary,
with special emphasis on guaranteeing freedom of expression and freedom of the media.
However, aware of the nature of the government in Montenegro, which is characterized by visible connections between its leaders and the "champions" of organized crime in the country and beyond,
people gathered in Democratic Montenegro express a justified fear that fake, cosmetic and reforms of a purely formal nature, without any concrete results, may lead to the so-called blockages in negotiations.
This is because a faster replacement of the current government, which is finding it increasingly difficult to hide, on concrete examples and easily proven, the lack of political will to fulfill the tasks set before it, is an urgent need of our society.
Unburdened of the mortgages with which the ruling parties have survived for so long in power, Democratic Montenegro, which is made up of people of high moral and professional qualities,
refined sense of justice and equality,
as well as convinced fighters for freedom of thought and expression,
without a doubt, it will play a much more active role in bringing Montenegro closer to the date of full membership in the EU.
In the process of the accession of Montenegro to the European Union carried out so far, there are no visible results for the welfare of the citizens of Montenegro, because a large number of citizens and their families live on the edge of poverty.
without employment prospects
and creating conditions for them to live from their work like any normal world.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Strongly supporting the European integration process
with the aim of institutional and economic strengthening of Montenegro,
deeply believing that he is doing this in the interest of all citizens of Montenegro;
building bridges of cooperation with all countries throughout Europe and the world;
z an active role in the process of accession of Montenegro to the European Union,
and as a pro-European party resolutely advocating that fundamental values ​​of respect for human dignity come to life in Montenegro,
freedom,
democracy,
jed¬nakosti;
the highest quality and most responsible road in the EU
which will ensure the achievement of the highest standards of developed European countries in terms of the promotion and protection of human rights,
rule of law,
which will result in the economic development of the country,
increased inflow of foreign investments,
creation of new jobs,
drastically reducing the rate of corruption and nepotism,
decisive fight against organized crime;
reaching the highest standards of functioning and organization of Montenegro as a modern state based primarily on the most successful European democracies;
promoting the value and benefits of the European Union, but also dialogue with citizens about all the advantages,
but also the shortcomings of membership in the Union because the alliance for Europe must first and foremost be a broad alliance of citizens and an alliance with citizens;
for us, joining the European Union will not be the end of the job, but the beginning of great work to create a better life in advanced Montenegro.
DEMOCRACY BEGINS WITH THE SETTING OF INSTITUTIONS
Our task:
Strong institutions,
professional and competent staff.
Introduction:
"The law will be one and the same for all", the words of Prince Nikola on the eve of the battle at Vuči Dol in the period of the creation of statehood that covered a heterogenous and multicultural society.
are all-time imperatives in the process of legal formation of the state.
Institutions are the rules of the game in a society and the mechanisms for its protection.
The totality of the independent judiciary,
effective political institutions
and professional and responsible state administration
ensures the rule of law
and legally regulated Montenegro.
Institutions have a moral, motivational and adaptive component.
The essential moral feature of institutions is a binding instruction to abstain from certain actions.
The measure of humanity, and therefore correct public action, does not lie only in the desire to do something,
but also in not accepting to take some steps and
in refusing to resort to any means.
Political institutions determine who is elected and who agrees to perform public duties in the political sphere.
Institutions create a clear picture of what politicians and public officials expect in their work,
but also what is expected of them.
Strong institutions mean that those who enter the political game and accept public work have to give up many life chances and opportunities.
In this way, honest and competent personnel are encouraged to engage in politics, but also through organized political competition, the integrity and reputation of actors in political life is created and maintained.
Institutional constraints motivate people to focus on the best in themselves
and to assign public roles to those who can best perform them.
Institutions create incentives to take advantage of production and market opportunities.
By strengthening the feeling of security, they lead business entities to invest in the maintenance, improvement and expansion of property.
On the one hand, they create a framework within which people can predictably plan their lives and design business activities.
On the other hand, they determine the way in which the holders of state power, acting in the political sphere, can achieve socially desirable innovations in the legal and political system.
Institutions are a means of adapting to the challenges we face during the development of the social system.
Without institutions, there is no conceptual approach to solving social problems: responses to problems are reduced to case-by-case reactions.
Case-by-case reactions strengthen the personal authority of those officials who solve given problems, all to the detriment of the general organization of society.
With such a strengthening of personal authority, political competition turns into a multiplication of problems in order not to prove the personal abilities of political rivals.
Society as a whole will suffer from the disorganization of the system because neither the nature nor the intensity of each individual problem, which may appear in political competition that is not institutionally based, is known in advance.
In order to achieve their adaptive function, institutions must be freed from ideology, which by nature is insensitive to specific political, economic and social circumstances and interests of the individual.
Strong and independent institutions guarantee compliance with all laws,
protect human rights
and equal opportunities for all.
Strong and independent institutions ensure optimal organization of power, its division and balance.
Strong and independent institutions make economic life predictable and integrative.
Strong and independent institutions create among citizens a sense of attachment to the legal and political order and
contribute to social cohesion.
Institutions mean that we keep in mind the limits of our own behavior,
but they also let us know what we can expect from the holders of state power and other people with whom we live and cooperate in an organized social community.
The measure of an orderly and just society is to impose the same restrictions on everyone, so that everyone has equal chances and equally reliable expectations regarding the behavior of the state and other people.
Where there are stable institutions, we have no idea how others will behave, but we reliably plan and shape our mutual relations.
In institutional backwardness, we are condemned to ourselves, we dream, guess, guess and doubt ourselves.
Institutional development means that we combine resources with others with certainty and predictability, plan together and think about the future.
Permanent political institutions have multiple roles: they ensure the legitimacy of the government system,
reveal and reflect the views of citizens,
they reduce the costs of collective decision-making and contribute to the maintenance of the legal order as a public capital good.
An effective political system implies civil liberties,
protection of political and other minorities,
free elections,
responsible political leadership at all levels of government
and the absence of fear of qualified majorities in political decision-making and the modality of direct democracy.
We believe that the degree of acceptability of normative solutions in the political process is one of the basic criteria of their value.
We in qualified majorities do not see a method of blocking collective decision-making,
nor the maintenance of social tensions
nor the opportunity to make party agreements beyond objective criteria.
In qualified majorities, we see a method of wholeheartedly and sincerely searching for solutions that will have the widest circle of acceptability and the highest level of commitment to the legal-political order, in an otherwise very divided and heterogeneous society.
EDITED MONTENEGRO
The judiciary has a dual role in an organized society:
protects the rights and freedoms of citizens
and contributes to the separation of powers through the supervision of other branches of government, protecting the principle of legality.
The judiciary must be the supreme, most authoritative and most credible place of interpretation of the law and the only address for the protection of legality.
An independent and efficient judiciary does not redirect risks and uncertainties but reduces or eradicates them.
A good judiciary brings to life the principle of social justice
and removes barriers to market entry by strengthening beneficial competitive pressure in the economy.
If there is no independent and efficient judiciary, it is inevitable that citizens will choose inferior alternative methods of behavior:
take justice into their own hands,
empower quasi-state groups to protect them,
give up any activity,
they fall into apathy or even leave the country.
The basic tasks of modern state administration can be seen in:
resolving rights and obligations in individual administrative cases, normative activities in the process of implementing state policies,
but also in strengthening regulatory certainty and
representing and promoting the ideas of good administration and administrative efficiency.
A professional and competent state administration makes the state apparatus less sensitive to cyclical changes in the political majority,
and more sensitive to the individual needs and initiatives of citizens.
Description of the condition:
The development of political conditions during the last three decades,
uncontrolled transition and political entrepreneurship in the form of artificial divisions are the main obstacles to essential institutional reforms, for two reasons.
First, the enormous political and social energy necessary for institutional change is wasted.
Second, citizens' attention is diverted from key problems and they are led to neglect institutional shortcomings, which weakens the motivation of state authorities to work responsibly and approach reforms.
The political system of Montenegro is ineffective due to the irremovability of the government.
The government is doing everything to make the change of government a risky event for at least two reasons.
First, the current government raises the price of a change of government:
she is ready to resort to illegal means in order to preserve power
and accompanying privileges.
Second, the democratic change of government in Montenegro is an unknown in the eyes of the domestic and international public, who do not yet know what it might look like when it happens.
We are firmly committed to a peaceful and democratic transfer of power and the change of power.
Artificial divisions are a powerful political technology to breathe life into the levers of power
and obscured robbery as a method of privatizing social resources.
The unchanged government, for its own private reasons, replaced the collectivist spirit of the previous period with collectivism of a new kind
and ideologising every social issue: he imposes his own needs recklessly, at any cost and without considering specific political, economic and other social conditions.
The division of society into blocs reinforces the ignoring of numerous important social problems and destroys individuals' sense of personal value, responsibility and initiative.
Overcoming artificial divisions will lead to a more even distribution of political influence among the citizens of Montenegro.
The more unequally distributed political influence among citizens, the greater the possibility of interest groups to rise above society and impose their particular interests as socially binding.
The greater and sharper the division of society, the greater the risk of dramatic changes in political and other institutions, which makes society less stable and less stimulating to perform socially desirable activities.
If divisions are artificially maintained into two politically isolated groups,
the ruling political elite has a strong motive to redistribute resources instead of creating them: it takes resources from everyone, and primarily satisfies the interest of the group that supports its survival in power.
The elite below the top of the political pyramid also engage in redistributing resources to their advantage.
Montenegrin society is paying a high price for political entrepreneurship and the technology of an irresponsible government.
The judiciary does not ensure an optimal level of legal security
and does not enjoy the high trust of citizens.
The causes of this were the weakening of the mechanisms of supervision and the strengthened mechanisms of pressure from other segments of the state apparatus.
but also an unbearable level of indifference to lawlessness, as well as any individual deprived of the belief that he can exert a significant influence on social outcomes with his own strength.
Weak protection of rights by the judiciary in our society leads to multiple harmful phenomena:
increasingly frequent use of non-institutional resources (self-protection),
engagement of illegal groups for debt collection and contract protection
and what is worst is the habituation of citizens to the weaknesses of the judiciary and the inaccessibility of justice.
The system of selection, dismissal and promotion of judicial personnel is not completely and coherently regulated,
and constitutional and legal designs are out of step with social reality.
Political instability in Montenegro and the probability of losing power hinders comprehensive reforms of state administration and
causes the continuity of irrational spending of resources in the public sector.
The irresponsible government has in mind that the consequences of the comprehensive reform of the state administration are long-term and has no motive to approach them because it is oriented towards short-term gains in the processes of constant political campaigns (in which it can lose not only political mandates but also deposits of illegally acquired capital).
Of particular concern is the constant decline in the reputation of the state administration and persistent negative selection of staff in the public sector!
The creation of voting machinery implies the engagement of a part of incompetent and irresponsible staff in the state administration.
Incompetent is the one who has no business opportunities outside the state administration
and treats the political authorities uncritically.
Irresponsible is the one who does not suffer moral sanction,
does not question himself,
and he listens to the other without question.
Hiring incompetent staff brings down the reputation of the state administration and affects existing and potential quality staff.
It wrongly sends a bad signal about the first, and it sends a bad signal to the others and dissuades them from applying for a job in the state administration.
The salary system and the method of evaluating the work of civil servants and employees is not objectified and is not deprived of opportunities for volunteerism, i.e. the arbitrariness of the elders of the body.
The state administration faces great challenges in order to realize the tasks imposed by the market-oriented socio-economic organization and integration processes.
State administration must operate within the principles of the European model of administration
and adopt a service-oriented concept of state administration bodies.
The creation of regulatory bodies did not produce the expected effects: safety, efficiency and autonomy in the performance of entrusted public functions.
Many public regulatory agencies received significant responsibilities in the process of transferring them from ministries that reluctantly agreed to relinquish their responsibilities and tried to keep the new bodies de jure and de facto (formally and actually) under their influence, reducing their independence to a low level. .
Unclear strategies of their actions, superficial compliance with the demands of international actors and slowness in passing accompanying legal acts also contributed to the defects of the regulatory bodies.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
The guiding principles of the reform of political institutions are:
a. Responsibility of elected political representatives
b. Positive staff selection, involvement in politics of people with integrity and reputation
c. Representation in the institutions of the political system of different social interests in order to avoid political inequality
d. The greater the opportunity for citizens to influence political outcomes
The basic changes in the political institutional framework are:
Open party lists and preferential voting;
Immediate election of mayors and presidents of municipalities.
The proposed solutions can achieve socially effective changes in the political system:
1. Strengthening the political position of citizens:
they have more rights and opportunities to express themselves,
have the chance to participate in several centers of political power,
have a greater influence on the election outcome,
they have a stronger motive to participate in political processes.
2. Deconcentration of political power.
3. Improvement of the principle of political responsibility.
Voters are held accountable for implemented policies and promised programs, on whose decision the stay in power depends.
Politicians have a motive to bring their public actions as close as possible to the views of citizens for the sake of re-election and not to the inner party leadership.
The basic values ​​that we see as the meaning of judicial reforms are:
a. Independence, autonomy, impartiality and responsibility of the judiciary;
b. Increasing the level of trust in the judiciary;
c. Improvement of judicial efficiency;
d. Improving the transparency of the work of judicial institutions;
e. Availability and lower prices of judicial services for citizens seeking protection of their rights;
f. Ensuring completeness, coherence and the highest level of certainty of procedural legislation.
Of particular importance in the judicial reform will be:
Creation of conditions for the adoption of a legal act for precise evaluation and assessment of the results of the work of judges and prosecutors, as well as criteria for advancement according to merit;
creation of conditions for the introduction of specialized (special) administrative courts as segments of the administrative court or court departments in the administrative court for the application of new and complex branches of law (primarily antimonopoly law, tax law);
financing of continuous training of judicial staff, visits to courts of other countries;
- improving the position and increasing the effectiveness of the auxiliary judicial professions: lawyers and notaries;
affirmation of alternative ways of resolving court disputes (mediation, arbitration, etc.)
with their completion and additional improvement:
the introduction of mandatory mediation in certain disputes,
simplification of the procedure for giving executive power to an agreement in mediation,
tax reduction and the like;
improving the position of parties in civil and criminal proceedings through changes to procedural laws.
First of all, at this moment, it refers to the reduction of the sum of money for disputes of lesser value in commercial disputes and the reduction of the sum of money in connection with the admissibility of revision when it comes to commercial disputes.
We believe that the estimated sums of money are too high, taking into account the economic capacity of domestic companies and the determination to encourage the entrepreneurship of small and medium-sized companies.
State administration reform
State administration reform is a complex process, not a simple act.
Professionalization and independence are imperative
while avoiding turning the state administration into a closed elite that is not subject to an appropriate accountability regime.
The priorities in the state administration reform are: 1. Independence.
This principle is achieved systemically through several lines: special status within the state apparatus;
the selection of managers through public tenders for a longer period than the cycle of the bodies of the government system that elect them;
consolidation of the character of the mandate of managers or collective bodies exercising competences.
2. Responsibility for respecting rights and achieving measurable results.
This principle must include accountability both for complying with regulations and for achieving certain results.
By the nature of things, state administration is not subject to market forces and competition, but because of this position, it must not be the only segment of the social order that is not subject to change and evaluation of work results.
Following this principle, we are determined that the state administration strictly and consistently observes the regulations,
reports on its work to as many other bodies as possible,
but also meets certain performance indicators and criteria for evaluation of results.
3. Strengthening the rights of citizens as subjects of administrative-legal relations.
The state and the state administration must not view the citizen exclusively as a passive party to the administrative-legal relationship.
In this way, the productivity and cost efficiency of the public sector and the interest of citizens in monitoring administrative-legal activities and more active participation in them can be increased.
What will Democratic Montenegro do to increase the independence of the state administration:
we will create the conditions for the introduction of special (specialized) administrative courts as segments of administrative courts, primarily for more efficient application of specific branches of law, antimonopoly, tax, etc.
- we will expand the range of rights of citizens and legal entities as subjects of administrative-legal relations;
- introduction of specialized ombudsmen (protectors of citizens' rights) for certain administrative areas (eg tax ombudsman);
create conditions for evaluating the results of the work of civil servants, on the basis of which regular personnel changes and reduction of the bulky public sector would be carried out;
- creation of a special and independent body that would participate in evaluating the work of civil servants;
change in the method of electing the president and members of the State Commission for the Protection of Rights in the Public Procurement Procedure: the election should be made by the Assembly to which they will be accountable for their work, with the obligation to declare the Government as well;
change in the structure and election of the Agency for the Protection of Competition:
the establishment of the Council as a collective body, and the president who will be elected by the Assembly to whom he will be accountable for his work, with the obligation to report to the Government on market trends and established violations of market competition.
The agency now has only a director who exercises all responsibilities, appointed by the Government.
AN EFFECTIVE, NOT A DECLARATIVE FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION AND ORGANIZED CRIME
Our task:
Corruption and organized crime must become marginal social problems!
Introduction:
Corruption and organized crime represent the biggest obstacle to strengthening the rule of law
and building strong state institutions that should realize and protect state interests,
guided exclusively by the principles of professionalism, impartiality and legality in their work.
The high level of corruption and organized crime in society results in a low level of citizens' trust in state institutions,
low level of protection of freedoms and rights of citizens guaranteed by the Constitution,
strong extra-institutional influence of powerful individuals on social processes and important state decisions,
regression and lag in economic development,
large social stratification into a small number of extremely rich individuals who got rich illegally and the majority of poor citizens,
as well as the abuse of power during election processes so that a privileged group can stay in power and get richer at the expense of all other citizens.
Description of the condition:
In Montenegro, corruption and organized crime are key social problems.
The collapse of the former SFRY along with the terrible events of the war, a kind of promotion of smuggling as a saving state measure for citizens at the time of sanctions, which later grew into huge cigarette smuggling of international proportions, made Montenegro an oasis for the growth of key individuals from the government and persons closely connected with them. to state institutions that are subordinated to the individual interests of powerful individuals.
Huge amounts of money obtained by smuggling cigarettes and in other illegal ways were taken out of Montenegro.
However, part of that illegal money returned to Montenegro again to cause it new difficulties through the process of predatory privatization.
The fact is that in the process of privatization of economic entities, in most cases, the alleged strategic investors and customers of our companies are offshore companies based on exotic islands somewhere in the Atlantic.
This is how, unfortunately, privatization in Montenegro turned into a kind of money laundering through which powerful individuals got access to assets of enormous value created by generations.
Instead of new technologies, new knowledge and new jobs,
the so-called strategic investors only made an effort to register valuable property in the real estate cadastre as their ownership,
without the ambition to ensure development and modernization.
The personal economic motive was not present because they had already become enormously rich in an easy and illegal way.
A POWERFUL STATE, NOT POWERFUL INDIVIDUALS
Confirmation that privatization procedures were accompanied by corruption at a high level
we can find in the fact that strategic investors paid an extremely low price for the purchase of the majority package of shares of economic collectives, which was justified by contracting several times larger investment investments.
Such contracted investment was absent in most cases,
but there was also a lack of appropriate reaction by the Government of Montenegro, which in every such case had to terminate privatization contracts, activate effective guarantees and take other measures to prevent non-compliance with privatization contracts.
With the Actel government and the set of things we have been watching for so many years,
eliminating crime and corruption is an unsolvable enigma for Montenegrin society, and this should be clear to everyone.
In Montenegro, there is an exceptional coupling, that is, a high degree of dependence between criminal structures and parts of the institutions of the system, which means that this struggle in the current setting can only be declarative.
The only chance for Montenegro to win that battle is the establishment of a new democratic government that will be personified by pure, professional and brave individuals who are ready to play this difficult and
a responsible game because it is the basis and turning point for the future of Montenegro and not only to play it, but also to win it.
The first prerequisite for success is that the entire society, i.e. every segment of it, becomes aware of the disastrous consequences of high-level corruption.
In this important social mission, we find one of the key motives of our own political activity.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
We see the creation of an overall social environment for an effective fight against corruption and organized crime as one of the most significant, but at the same time, most difficult processes facing Montenegrin society.
For the overall progress of Montenegro, both democratically and economically, the key assumption is to defeat corruption and organized crime in the short term.
especially high-level corruption.
This implies a better legislative framework,
but also the sincere political will of the new democratic government of Montenegro to defeat this social evil
which has already significantly slowed down the development of Montenegro
and seriously threatens to threaten and slow down democratic processes even more
and overall development of Montenegro;
- we will invite all other political subjects and social actors who have clearly declared themselves for a decisive fight against corruption and organized crime to be together on this extremely challenging social task;
we will involve the civil sector to be an even stronger part of social action to defeat high-level corruption and the organized crime that goes hand in hand with it;
we will dedicate ourselves to creating the necessary conditions for the effective work of the media, appreciating their irreplaceable and important role in this process, especially emphasizing the importance of investigative journalism;
we will make a special effort to ensure that young people, from high school and student youth to unemployed young people, as well as employees whose rights are not respected at work, are a strong social force that clearly points out all injustices
and social decline that occur as a result of corruption and organized crime;
we will continuously point out the breadth of negative consequences for the future that corruption brings with it.
This is because we believe that the devastatingly negative consequences of corruption for social progress are not sufficiently presented in our society.
Now corruption is seen only as an abuse of public authority to gain material benefit or a better status in society, which it is.
However, it is a big mistake to reduce the consequences of corruption only to the acquisition of a privileged status and material benefits.
The much more serious consequences of corruption arise because some individual with public powers, by signing a contract to the detriment of the public interest, caused opportunities for progress to be missed for a long period of time.
High-level corruption robs everyone, especially young people, of a better future;
an adequate value judgment for all those who stole the future from society for the sake of acquiring personal wealth.
Concrete examples must be used to show that this is a kind of betrayal of the vital economic and then other interests of Montenegro.
Drastic negative examples of the privatization of KAP, Željezara-Nikšić, hotel and tourism capacities, mines, wood industry companies and the like, arranged sales of state land in the most attractive locations for nothing,
show that harmful contractual arrangements motivated by high-level corruption have caused enormous damage to Montenegrin society.
We will make an expert analysis that shows what Montenegro would have received in the past ten to fifteen years if the strategic investors were companies with a proven business reputation, and not Offshore companies behind which money gained through smuggling and organized crime is hidden;
it is necessary to bring closer the examples of other countries that also had a high rate of corruption in one period and the way in which they defeated corruption.
The example of a number of Asian countries, Singapore, for example, should be affirmed. which, after fighting corruption, has an extremely high rate of economic growth, so it is classified in the so-called Asian economic tigers.
Montenegro with the indescribable beauty that nature gave it, the Adriatic Sea with its pearly coast, beautiful lakes, mountains and national parks, as a small country with about six hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants
it has all the prerequisites to, in a very short period of time, become one of the countries with a very high rate of economic growth, which is accompanied by a significantly increased standard of living of all its citizens.
STRONG ECONOMY
Our task:
Decommissioning according to the principle: sell, lend, spend.
Introduction:
The government system of a country is directly dependent on its economic development.
As a confirmation of this, there are countries that are practically without significant resources, and live richly, but there are countries extremely rich in resources, where the citizens live in poverty, which we ourselves are witness to.
The relationship of the state to the economy and the market is a key factor that directly affects economic development and the standard of citizens.
Description of the condition:
"Neoliberal economy" marked the Montenegrin economic scene for the last two decades, the consequences of which we pay every day.
Its uncontrolled application according to the principle of liberalize, privatize, stabilize brought the economy of Montenegro to the edge of the abyss.
It led to mass unemployment,
caused huge debt of citizens,
economy and state.
The main features of neoliberal economic policy are deregulation,
liberalization,
privatization,
reduction of public spending
and social security,
reduction of workers' rights in order to make profits easier.
Neoliberal economic policy did not have a positive outcome in Montenegro.
It has become completely clear that the neoliberal concept of the economy cannot provide well-being and long-term economic growth,
which was the main promise of those who propagated it.
On the contrary, Montenegro is in political, economic and social insecurity,
moral degradation,
and the exclusive focus on the greatest possible profit as a goal, led to a historically unprecedented rapid stratification of the population.
The economy of our country is in a dramatic state,
the number of unemployed reaches alarming levels,
the level of economic activity is extremely low, among other things, due to its deindustrialization.
The level of public and external debt is extremely high,
we have a huge balance of payments deficit,
and the budget deficit tends to grow from year to year.
In short, the state is essentially on the verge of bankruptcy.
All key macroeconomic indicators have extremely worrying parameters,
and the social situation is extremely bad.
Revenues from the budget, which have an original character, are not sufficient to service current consumption, and this is another proof that the economic policy was conducted without a vision.
Budget gaps are filled on a case-by-case basis, usually spontaneously, by borrowing,
sale of property,
that is, what generations have created and preserved for decades and through contractual arrangements with "strategic partners".
The situation is continuously deteriorating due to overdue obligations,
irresponsibly issued guarantees
and harmful contracts.
A large number of natural resources, economic entities and tourist destinations have been sold off, destroyed and devastated,
which essentially represents a true mirror of the ten-year rule, its purpose and the scope that they have achieved, especially from the point of view of future generations.
RICH MONTENEGRO
Montenegro, as a small and open economy, has a negative trade balance with foreign countries,
because imports significantly exceed exports.
When we talk about the structure of imports, the most important items are food, equipment and machinery, vehicles, mineral products and chemicals, while the structure of exports is dominated by raw materials and semi-products, including basic metals, aluminum, food and beverages.
The main weaknesses of the Montenegrin economy are the unsustainable export structure
and poor export competitiveness of our production.
One of the key disadvantages is the existence of a large number of companies that are in a monopolistic or oligopolistic situation, which is very unfavorable from the point of view of consumers and their well-being.
By moving from a bicameral to a unicameral model of corporate governance, Montenegro significantly weakened control
which is especially important to point out in a situation where there is no capital market as practically the only factor of corporate control.
In Montenegro, the capital market is young and underdeveloped, and we have a dominant role of banks, which is not a characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon system, which Montenegro founded with a legislative framework.
Privatization in one significant part was not carried out with the desire to restore the companies,
but to bring about the shutdown by machinations,
thousands of workers left at the labor office,
and valuable assets become the property of privileged individuals well known to the Montenegrin public,
so the diagnosis and cause of the economic reality is very clear to those citizens.
In those cases of privatization, it was done according to the same matrix, which is that under dubious circumstances, the owners of the company become privileged individuals, inherit the valuable assets of the company, which they either sell or transfer through various machinations and fictitious tenders to the ownership of their companies, and the final epilogue was the taking of the company into bankruptcy where the creditors, i.e. a significant part of the workers do not have the possibility to collect or the creation of assumptions that they cannot be compensated.
Proof of that is the number of privatized companies that are in bankruptcy.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Giving up the disastrous neoliberal economic policy and abandoning the atypical economic model ("which works according to the principle: sell, borrow and spend"), the results of which are more than devastating and are reflected in the sale of assets and resources, uncontrolled borrowing and the consumption of goods mainly from exports ;
reaffirmation of the role of the state and its institutions in reforming the economy;
knowledge-based economy as a prerequisite for the successful entry of Montenegro into the new competitive era of economic relations at the global, regional, national, and even local levels;
policy oriented according to three principles:
economic growth
social equality
sustainability
Democratic Montenegro must realize these three principles as equal, because only this ensures quality growth focused on the common good and sustainability.
and the main goal of economic policy must be to improve the quality of life of the majority of citizens of Montenegro;
long-term sustainable dynamic economic growth,
with full employment
and equal and fair distribution of national income;
insisting on the principle of justice, because it is a condition for equality, economic efficiency and well-being of all citizens;
economic policy measures significantly improving the competitiveness of the economy;
improving the application of anti-monopoly measures, therefore, it is necessary to fully open the market in all segments where competition is limited by encouraging investments in those areas;
immediate taking of measures against all investors who did not respect the contractual obligations from the privatization contract, including termination of the contract;
the introduction of the institute of automatic bankruptcy with the aim of reducing the problem of insolvency, which would have a positive effect on the stability of the economy itself;
economic policy measures to increase agricultural production, forestry and fishing
and improving the conditions for the realization of agricultural products;
undertaking concrete and productive measures in rural areas with the aim of village development and the construction of supporting infrastructure as a prerequisite for prosperity and development;
dominant focus of production on the cultivation of early fruits and vegetables,
increasing greenhouse production and stimulating the production of organic food,
as agricultural crops in which Montenegro, according to all key assumptions, has exceptional potential;
planned valorization of forest wealth;
construction of new energy capacities in cooperation with renowned strategic partners in the field of energy;
active measures aimed at diversifying the tourist offer and extending the season;
improving the transport infrastructure in the country, as a key prerequisite for strong economic development and regional connectivity;
reviewing privatization contracts in order to ensure compliance with the imperative legal norm that states that the land for which no market fee has been paid in the privatization or bankruptcy process will remain the property of the state, on which the owners of the building have the right of first refusal or the right of first lease.
This is due to the fact that there are numerous examples that show that this imperative legal obligation was not respected, i.e. the facts show that a significant part of privileged individuals obtained valuable assets of privatized companies at a price far lower than the market price.
Of course, a separate analysis would be needed for a detailed presentation of individual cases, but it should be remembered that, for example, extremely valuable land ended up being owned by some individuals for 3 cents per m2 in Plužine, 50 cents per m2 in Podgorica or 40 euros per m2 in exclusive locations on the sea coast;
Compilation of the "White Book on Privatization in Montenegro" which will answer the questions of who privatized the company and under what conditions, at what price was the property purchased, what is the fate of the company and the workers themselves, in whose hands is the property today and who owns everything earned hundreds of millions of euros on those transactions,
all with the aim of returning the abducted to the state and its citizens.
ATTRACTION OF INVESTMENTS
Our task:
creating conditions that will allow respectable investors to invest in Montenegro.
Introduction:
The volume, structure and efficiency of investments in the economy significantly determine the path of its development, that is, it can be said that they trace the path of development of a country.
Proceeding from the fact that insufficient domestic accumulation imposes the need to attract foreign capital, because foreign direct investments represent the most efficient and useful form of capital import for developing countries, and therefore for Montenegro.
Description of the condition:
When messages are heard that greater investments from the European framework are necessary for results in the field of rule of law, then it is clear to the layman that by replacing theses they want to cover up their own responsibility for the alarming situation that exists in Montenegro on many grounds.
Montenegro's path towards the EU depends on whether there is a will and desire to reform ourselves in the internal field, first of all for our sake, for our future.
Only a country that has independent and stable institutions of the system, where law reigns, and not lawlessness, where no one can be stronger than the state, represents a suitable ground for attracting serious and respectable investors.
The economic recovery of Montenegro depends to a large extent on the inflow of foreign direct investments.
Foreign direct investments are extremely important factors in increasing growth and competitiveness.
Foreign direct investment does not mean only the inflow of fresh capital,
already have multiplicative effects on the national economy, which means modern technologies, new management, new methods of production and marketing brought with them by reliable strategic partners.
Foreign direct investments have a favorable effect on the country's economic growth because:
directly improve overall economic activity;
positively affect the economic performance of the economy;
raise the level of employment and the growth of the income of employees;
enable the transfer of new technologies and know-how;
affect the structure of exports;
increase the total tax revenues of the state;
they affect direct economic inputs through the purchase of goods and services, and the payment of salaries to employees, which is a direct contribution of the entry of foreign companies;
contribute to balanced regional development;
encourage the development of the labor market through training and education for employees, suppliers or distributors;
they strengthen competition, through improved quality of goods and services, which is one type of anti-monopoly measures.
MONTENEGRO I TRUST
The overall macroeconomic environment is a decisive factor for investors when making decisions about their investments, especially when it comes to greenfield investments.
The state can stimulate many elements of the macroeconomic environment,
so its role must be active because foreign direct investments come to areas where they can make as much profit as possible with as little risk as possible.
It is evident that foreign partners and potential investors do not trust domestic audit reports, and if the existing law were to be applied literally, the engagement of foreign companies would not be possible at all.
Negative reports from auditors are a real rarity because they fear that they would lose their jobs with those companies.
and it is not rare in practice that when they sense a negative report, managers try to change the final assessment before the meeting of the shareholders' assembly in order to protect their position.
Many joint stock companies are either unable or their management is unwilling to offer sophisticated information to potential investors.
Lack of information for investors means an additional level of risk and they are objectively unable to make a quality investment decision.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Taking comprehensive measures to encourage foreign direct investments,
including fiscal incentives (for example, tax exemptions),
financial incentives (for example, investment subsidies) and other attraction instruments (for example, infrastructure services at preferential prices).
Encouraging foreign direct investments means accelerating economic growth, which also occurs due to externalities,
such as knowledge spillover
and encouraging competition in the country;
immediate termination of the practice of contractual arrangements with investors with the so-called an off shore destination without a business environment, that is, the creation of conditions for strategic investors to be companies with indisputable business creditworthiness that bring healthy capital and new technologies to Montenegro;
improving the business environment as a necessary prerequisite for attracting foreign and domestic investments;
raising the level of competitiveness of the Montenegrin economy through the establishment of business zones, clustering and the implementation of system solutions oriented towards clients;
improving the quality of corporate management, as an extremely important segment for economic development, i.e.
encouraging domestic and foreign investments in the economy.
However, there will be no inflow of investments until investors are convinced of the reduction of risk and until tangible proof is obtained that the Government's activities are not just rhetoric.
In developing countries, the government's role is to pave the way.
Determination, transparency and an honest government will be needed to support the reform of corporate governance, because without taking concrete steps and political risks, there are no reforms.
creation of conditions for the formation of appropriate bodies at the local level that will deal with economic development in
part of the creation of benefits for foreign investors.
BUDGET FOR THE STATE, NOT FOR INDIVIDUALS
Our task:
Fiscal sustainability of Montenegro,
public interest in the first place!
Introduction:
The basic instrument for financing public revenues and public expenditures in all modern countries is the budget.
The budget is not only an act for financing state functions,
rather, the state implements economic and social policy through the instruments of fiscal policy and the instruments of resource allocation.
The budget is one of the most important instruments of national income redistribution, which determines the further purpose of these funds allocated to personal, material and investment expenses.
This new distribution has a dominant effect on the production and consumption of goods.
Description of the condition:
The economy of Montenegro faces a large number of risks:
extremely low degree of competitiveness,
high degree of illiquidity of the real sector,
high level of public debt of around 60% of GDP,
high share of public spending in GDP,
high current account deficit of the balance of payments,
high share of current expenditures in the budget,
high proportion of bad loans,
high interest rates.
It is clear that there is no vision of economic development and sustainability of the budget, but the fiscal policy is largely left to the elements and solving problems on a case-by-case basis.
Numerous budget holes that were caused by predatory privatization contracts were usually solved by additional burdens on citizens or by denying their rights (unrecorded in European frameworks "euro for euro" tax, VAT increase, freezing of pensions, etc.).
Citizens paid for completely planned and deliberate economic failures, behind which there is rightfully a basic suspicion of the existence of corruption at a high level.
Credit debts that are already seriously endangering the fiscal system are usually made for non-productive purposes, that is, to solve one's own economic failures.
The policy of borrowing by taking loans for a grace period, refinancing loans after the end of the grace period with the payment of an intercalary interest rate, only at the price of transferring the burden of repayment to future generations shows the level of ability of those who managed the processes, forgetting that the ability is not to sell what has been created for decades and to borrow on credit, it is the ability to create new value on a sound basis.
The manner in which construction land is disposed of by the executive power at the state level, but also by a significant number of local self-governments, shows the degree of non-domestic attitude towards the public interest and especially numerous machinations in the field of urban planning.
In many cases, land was sold under extremely dubious circumstances when its purpose was not regulated by detailed urban plans in a way that meant maximum valorization in the interest of citizens.
Immediately after the land would have passed into the hands of privileged individuals at a price many times lower than the market price,
planning documents were adapted to pre-prepared schemes of investors and individuals who held public functions.
Numerous illogicalities in the field of public procurement, rigged tenders, dubious contracts, especially contract annexes, i.e. additional works as the most suitable mechanism for corruption often deprived the budget of significant funds.
Examples of the final price of the completed works being at least twice as high as the contract have become a practice, that is, a way of acting that has led us to a situation where instead of new kindergartens, schools, hospitals, roads, today we are talking about tens of millions whose essential flows are unknown.
In many cases, public-private partnerships were suitable for the alleged public interest to be misused, in order to use state property as a stake, along with numerous other benefits and direct damage to the budget, as a way to satisfy the personal interests of privileged individuals, who appeared on foreign private partners.
In short, various forms and forms of machinations were carried out in a way that meant abuse of public interest, enormous damage to the budget, and direct benefit to the responsible managers and persons connected with them.
The proof of this is the well-being and wealth of those individuals, for which there is no basis in what is their official statement of the income they achieve,
and on the other hand, an alarming situation, i.e. numerous problems in which the citizens and the state of Montenegro find themselves.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Reduction of public debt,
share of public spending in GDP,
deficit of the current account of the balance of payments, as well as a gradual reduction in the share of current budget expenditures in favor of capital expenditures;
strong action to suppress the gray economy and heal the economy,
which will significantly contribute to the increase of budget revenues, capturing all revenues that belong to the state by law;
strict adherence to the European normative framework that defines a budget deficit of up to 3%, the level of public debt up to 60% of GDP, fiscal strategy, inspection supervision, as well as effective sanctions;
adoption of the Law on Fiscal Responsibility as a condition for the introduction of fiscal rules in the area of ​​public debt, budget deficit, public spending and public revenues;
consolidation of public spending,
determination of the public debt management strategy in order to determine the debt repayment plan;
successful fiscal control and adequate internal and external audit mechanisms of all spending units of the budget;
- reducing the share of the current budget and increasing the share of the capital budget;
extremely restrictive approach when issuing state guarantees;
ensuring transparency of financial operations of local self-government units i
effective system of their control;
adopting a strategy for reducing the debt of local self-government units;
continuous and decisive undertaking of measures and activities in order to improve the tax culture of taxpayers,
increasing fiscal discipline,
reduction of tax evasion
and reduction of tax debt;
clean and professional individuals who will perform public functions in the interest of citizens, not tycoons and privileged individuals.
OUR STRATEGY FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
Our task:
The modernization of Montenegro is not a job for only one person and only for one party.
Introduction:
According to the census from 2011, the participation of citizens between 15 and 30 years of age in the total number of inhabitants in Montenegro is 21.4% or a total of 132,701 inhabitants.
What are the problems of young people?
Do they have fears?
How do they imagine life?
Is Montenegro the country of the future?
Every democratic government and every modern state must have an answer to these and many other questions
Young people form their attitudes and values ​​under the influence of their family, their peers, the media, the educational system and society as a whole, striving to achieve the highest social values ​​that dominate in the modern democratic world.
All this leads us to the conclusion that the period of physical and psychological maturation is a very complex and sensitive process in the life of each individual.
Description of the condition:
Young people in Montenegro are excluded from the decision-making process, and therefore they are denied the opportunity to create their own future and actively participate in shaping the country in which they want to live.
The Montenegrin economy is in such a state that it does not open the possibility of creating job opportunities for young people.
In Montenegro, young people are used as cheap and mostly simple labor force, in which the job is most often obtained with a party card, and not with knowledge and personal abilities.
Youth unemployment is drastically higher than the unemployment of other categories of residents.
Young people find it increasingly difficult to find work, and their expertise and level of education are not taken into account when selecting candidates, but party affiliation and suitability are almost the only criteria for selection, which lowers the quality of work in case of possible employment.
Montenegro lacks numerous cultural, artistic and sports facilities,
which negatively affects the development and maturation of young people.
The atmosphere of party divisions and previously known results of the competition resulted in a loss of motivation for education, work and training, which drastically increased the percentage of "brain drain" from Montenegro to economically and economically developed countries.
The extremely difficult material situation makes it impossible for a huge number of young people to travel, to get an education, to live independently and to found their families.
MODERN MONTENEGRO
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
In every modern country, young people are a symbol of freedom and democracy, and they must be given the chance to freely create the future and
they fight for the realization of basic human rights and freedoms of man and citizen;
we will adopt and consistently apply the National Strategy for Youth with the aim of fundamentally improving the status of young people in Montenegro
and the creation of a modern state and modern conditions for the life and work of young people;
we will work on creating a new generation of young politicians,
because new energy, ideas and knowledge are a prerequisite for creating a better life,
new social values,
modern conditions for young people and the betterment of the entire society;
- we will reduce taxes for employers who employ young people;
we will provide practical training for all high school students and students, during schooling, that is, studying;
we will encourage the social activism of young people;
we will form an information system with a unique database on the level of education, professional qualifications, their extracurricular activities and other data and information so that employers have an insight into the personnel base of our country;
we will throw politics out of educational institutions
and enable the education system to be run by the successful, ready and capable, and not by the politically eligible;
we will enable students and high school students to participate in the creation of laws and other general legal acts that apply to them;
we will ensure the application of functional education in Montenegro based on the real needs of the Montenegrin economy;
We will provide pupils and students with modern curricula, modern and professional literature,
contemporary spatial conditions
and acquiring knowledge;
we will insist that sport is not abused for non-sporting purposes;
we will fight against all forms of violence in the family, on the street, in schools, colleges,
applying a quality and modern strategy for young people
and their active involvement in the decision-making process at all levels of organization;
we will never again be divided by national, political or religious identity and affiliation, but solely by how much we know, how successful we are and how we influence the future of current generations and generations to come;
we will ensure the efficient use of EU pre-accession funds intended for the development and training of young people in their interest and in the interest of all citizens of Montenegro;
we will advocate for full membership of Montenegro in the EU, because it is the best framework for improving the life and position of young people in Montenegro;
our primary patriotic goal will be modern, developed, rich
and European Montenegro.
SPORTS DEVELOPMENT A PRIORITY
Our task:
to significantly improve the conditions for the development of sports, because athletes are our best ambassadors!
ATHLETES ARE THE BEST AMBASSADORS
Introduction:
Sport is a sign of recognition of the country, its affirmation and promotion, bringing people together, healthy guidance of the young generation, a symbol of friendship, reconciliation, in one word, sport is life.
He brings people together, teaches them through victories and defeats,
wealth of diversity, principles of justice and equality.
Sport has no boundaries, it knows only the measure of victory and defeat, success and failure, that's why it is rightly said that athletes are the best ambassadors of a country, its mirror in the world.
Small countries in particular, which naturally play an inferior role in large global matches, through sports have the opportunity to dominate the world stage in the most beautiful way possible, which we had the opportunity to feel with the great performances of our sportsmen.
In addition to the effects on the global level, such achievements have very productive internal implications, first of all, on encouraging young generations to play sports,
healthy ways of growing up, from which society can only benefit.
That is why the creation of conditions for the development of sports, its affirmation, the protection of athletes and the improvement of their rights represent the priority tasks of the authorities of all countries that put the interests of the country and its citizens first.
Description of the condition:
Montenegro is a nursery of top athletes, a climate that breeds exceptional talents, viewed in relation to the number of inhabitants, a sports superpower,
but also a country from which young athletes can't wait to leave, and of course not by chance.
The state of sports infrastructure, especially in these most popular sports, is very bad,
the conditions in which especially young talents develop in certain sports is unworthy of a human being, let alone a young, courageous, talented athlete, a future national team player.
There is no way we understand that young people, in the specific matter, athletes, are the foundation, that is, the base of every system.
In those years of development, they need the most conditions, they are built up to the age of 18-19, the rest is only a superstructure that cannot go without the right foundation.
In developed countries, coaches of the youngest categories have a higher salary than colleagues who coach older ages, precisely to show the importance of basic sports.
A special topic is the quality of club sports in Montenegro, which is practically at the lowest levels.
In many sports, this mostly came down to a few clubs that play each other 4-5 times during the season, because the leagues do not have enough clubs, the matches are played among the actor's friends and closest relatives, not to mention the fact that there are not even 1% of athletes in To Montenegro who have a regulated employment relationship, i.e. to whom taxes and contributions are paid.
Also, the position of a coach is unenviable, insecure, usually short-term and depends in most cases on those who have nothing to do with sports.
And this is precisely one of the causes of this state of affairs, when the dominant role, i.e. the power of management in Montenegrin sports is largely held by individuals who have no contact points with sports, and along the way they also have other highly debatable references that have never gone hand in hand in a healthy system. sports.
When you add to all of the above that sport is on the sidelines for our officials, until a semi-final or final comes and the need to be "seen", then the cause and diagnosis of the current situation is clear.
The fact that the country of European champions and world vice-champions owns two and sometimes three indoor swimming pools shows the most plastic how many countries responsibly monitor the achievement of top sports results.
Podgorica is one of the few major cities that does not have an indoor swimming pool in the 21st century, and the capital is a water polo superpower.
The citizens of Montenegro, and not even the water polo players of our clubs, have forgotten the numerous adversities they went through in previous years, when they successfully spread the glory of Montenegrin club water polo, and we remember well what the relationship of the formally most responsible was then.
The state of football infrastructure is at an extremely low level, even though it is the most massive and popular sport.
Montenegro does not have a national stadium, and the image we send to the world when the national team plays from the City Stadium in Podgorica, which does not have an east stand, is not proud of the bright sports and football tradition that we certainly have.
The facts that show that often in the winter months due to the condition of the football pitches, it is not possible to even play matches of the first football league, not to mention the lower levels and younger categories, clearly indicate how alarming the situation is and the urgent need for the state to decisively start construction sports infrastructure.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
The Ministry of Sports and Youth as the umbrella governing body because it is unacceptable that Montenegro, recognized in the world as a sports country, does not have the mentioned department in the Government of Montenegro;
that significant funds from the Capital Budget are directed to the construction of sports infrastructure;
that the Government of Montenegro, in cooperation with FSCG, starts the construction of the national stadium;
to prioritize the construction of at least one indoor swimming pool in Podgorica and in the north of Montenegro according to international standards and FINA rules;
to create all the formal assumptions and accompanying measures so that all professional athletes have all the rights from the employment relationship;
to improve the quality of physical education and the conditions for teaching in primary and secondary schools,
as well as improved conditions for playing sports in institutions of higher education;
that in the organization of the competent Ministry and local self-government bodies, it is possible for children in difficult financial conditions to train and attend schools and courses of various sports disciplines for free;
that the Government and local self-governments, in cooperation with the competent national sports federations and European and world organizations, improve the football infrastructure by building a stadium with an artificial surface
as well as adequate stadiums with natural surfaces for playing official matches,
as well as conditions for the development of indoor sports;
that the competent Ministry pays special attention to the conditions in which young athletes develop, i.e. to basic sports through younger categories of clubs, sports schools, and sports activities in primary and secondary schools;
that the ownership structures in the clubs as well as the ways of their establishment be made transparent in order to bring the ownership and management structures to a level that is in the interest of sports and athletes;
that additional work should be done on securing professional, competent and educated personnel,
but also the adequate degree of protection of the coaching profession and the encouragement of healthy competition;
that in all city districts and in local centers in suburban and rural areas, the construction of sports facilities for mass sports is supported and encouraged.
PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Our task:
Montenegro is an example of ecosystem protection and preservation, not an example of the existence of ecological black spots.
Introduction:
Environmental protection implies preventive action, damage control and everyone's responsibility in order to preserve the biological balance.
Understanding nature as the basic resource for the survival of all generations is basically the essence of the whole process.
The measurement element and determination of the quality stage of environmental protection are reflected in relation to: air quality and climate change, waste management, industrial pollution, noise protection, chemicals, water management, forestry, sea and coastal areas.
Sustainable development should represent a kind of balance between the interests and needs of current and future generations on the one hand, as well as the capacities of the environment on the other.
Instead of looking for a balance, borders are often forgotten in today's greed accompanied by the selfish need to satisfy the interests of individuals and various lobbies,
so the devastation of the environment represents one of the biggest problems today.
Natural wealth accompanied by rarely seen diversity and quality in a small area gives Montenegro great advantages,
but if the attitude towards nature that we have had in recent years and decades continues, it is clear that a bleak future awaits us and our descendants.
The European integration we strive for implies the adoption of EU environmental standards
which has defined high criteria in the field of environmental protection and does not accept compromises!
Description of the condition:
On September 21, 1991, in Žabljak, the members of the Parliament of Montenegro unanimously adopted the Declaration on the Declaration of Montenegro as an Ecological State.
The Constitution of Montenegro clearly defines in Article 1 that Montenegro is an ecological country.
However, when we look at the situation on the ground and our reality, it is clear that unfortunately these were only declarative and populist efforts.
The essence differs from the form in many ways, and the consequences are far-reaching every day.
If we don't face this problem openly as soon as possible and take urgent measures, it will be too late,
and the opening of Chapter 27, which deals with the environment in negotiations with the EU, will be an insurmountable obstacle for us.
Unfortunately, we have to admit that Montenegrin everyday life is garbage near watercourses and in them, wild garbage dumps next to roads, catering facilities, residential buildings, cut down and unplanned exploited forests, devastated riverbeds due to the theft of sand and gravel, illegal construction, faeces on the bathing grounds and much more. which shows how selfishness and greed destroy one's own being.
The existence of over 350 illegal landfills of various types of waste, a large number of ecological black spots (KAP, Nikšić Steel Mill, Pljevlja Thermal Power Plant and Coal Mine, Gradac Pljevlja landfills, Vasove vode Berane, Bijela shipyard...),
the way in which the majority of local governments manage waste,
led to the fact that this problem is also viewed culturally because the incompetence of the institutions of the system had a negative impact on the citizenry.
ECOLOGICAL MONTENEGRO
Forests are the largest ecosystems in Montenegro and cover 54% of the total territory, which makes us one of the most forested countries in Europe in terms of the degree of forest cover, along with the Scandinavian countries.
However, theft, unplanned felling, excessive exploitation, limited legislation are big problems in the field of forestry.
In addition to the fact that KAP is considered one of the biggest ecological black spots in Montenegro, which causes continuous poisoning of the Zeta plain, which "feeds" a large part of Montenegro,
many reports on the state of the environment have shown that the citizens of Zeta, together with the citizens of Pljevlja and Nikšić, breathe air of the worst quality.
The most difficult situation on this basis is in Pljevlja, where the level of air pollution is often drastically above the permitted limits.
In addition to the Thermal Power Plant and the Coal Mine, during the heating season, 20 tons of coal are burned daily in the two "Vodovod" boiler rooms, and in addition to them in Pljevlja there are about forty other boiler rooms and about 5,000 individual fire pits where over 100,000 tons of coal are burned annually without any protection.
The consequences are very serious and are reflected in the increase in the number of people suffering from respiratory diseases, the increase in mortality, the decrease in the birth rate and the decrease in the number of inhabitants, additionally due to emigration.
A major ecological genocide is also represented by the fact that privileged groups of individuals unreservedly exploit and devastate the beds of our rivers every day, extracting huge amounts of gravel illegally,
that is, earning in one day what the state and local self-governments, on the basis of concessions charged on this basis, earn in a year.
Of course, this state of affairs is only possible with the direct connection of those privileged individuals and various levels of government.
It is even more tragic when some privileged private companies illegally exploit material from rivers,
and after that they use it when performing public works and invoice it to the city or the state for collection,
ie in the end, the citizens pay them for the illegal exploitation and theft of their own natural wealth.
There are alarming data that show that close to 40% of the total generated waste, i.e. almost 80,000 tons of garbage, is disposed of in illegal landfills.
Indicators that waste is separated in an organized manner only in Podgorica, Kotor and Herceg Novi, and only 2.66% of the total amount,
are facts that show how local governments manage waste and how many modern sanitary landfills we have in Montenegro.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Investing in clean energy sources;
effective pollution prevention and control;
minimization of waste and environmental risks;
consistent implementation of the obligation established by law that the polluter of the environment pays for it the appropriate environmental compensation according to the established criteria;
intensification of the construction of sanitary landfills with recycling and processing of municipal waste;
encouraging the development of renewable energy sources;
affirmation of energy efficiency, i.e. tax and other stimulation of producers who use "green technologies"
stopping the devastation of riverbeds and lakes,
as well as illegal exploitation of gravel and sand;
continuous education and awareness raising of citizens about the need for environmental protection;
the decentralization of the authorities dealing with these issues;
introduction of an efficient information and monitoring system;
continued harmonization of domestic regulations with European Union law;
heating of Pljevlja in order to reduce pollution;
urgent allocation of funds from the budget and application in European funds for the rehabilitation of ecological black spots;
that the authorities at the state and local level put the issue of waste management at the top of their priorities, bearing in mind that delaying the resolution of this issue may have unfathomable economic and environmental consequences that we will pay for for a long time;
establishment of the Environmental Pollution Register in accordance with the PRTR Protocol;
that the maximum possible state capacities are immediately directed towards reaching EU environmental standards
because otherwise the negotiation process will be very uncertain.
Our task:
An economically secure and happy family.
MODERN MONTENEGRO
Introduction:
The family is the leading moral subject in Montenegrin society,
a source of motivation for social solidarity, mutual support of relatives
and social pressures for the defense and improvement of one's region, country and people.
The family prepares children for the process of education and social life.
Norms born in the life of a family are an important regulator of its members.
The function of the family in improving the demographic processes in a society is unavoidable.
Strong families can be drivers of entrepreneurship in the economy.
Moral cohesion in a sustainable family can ease the pressure on public social security and protection funds.
Moral cohesion in the family rests on the agreement of the parents and the division of roles between them, as well as the care and education of the children.
The basic components of a sustainable family are:
freely chosen and arranged relationship between parents, responsible exercise of parental rights
and protection of children's rights.
The optimal role of parents in modern conditions rests in the balance between realizing motherhood and fatherhood and performing socially desirable economic activities outside the family, for its well-being.
The state must not allow its public policies to disturb this balance.
Description of the condition:
The family is the basis of a stable society where a dominant system of values ​​is formed that affirms those virtues that are recognized in all democratic societies: morality, wisdom, constancy, courage, love and honesty.
Due to the increasingly frequent, on the one hand, the race for money, and on the other, great poverty and a particularly uncaring state, the family is left to fend for itself.
The result is an increase in domestic violence and, what is particularly worrying, an increase in the deviant behavior of children and teenagers.
The number of divorced marriages is also on the rise, and young people find it increasingly difficult to start a family due to economic insecurity.
The family, as the basic cell of society, was especially lost during the transition period, which is reflected in alienation, neglect of the old and infirm,
and society's concern for this most vulnerable category of the population was also absent.
With the development of society due to the increasing influence of global social trends, the composition and function of the family are changing, but it remains a social environment in which an indispensable role is fulfilled: raising and caring for children, solving the basic, most morally sensitive needs of man and the challenges he faces in the private sphere .
We are facing a decline in the birth rate and an increase in the number of abandoned children.
A decreasing number of families live in rural areas, which also has certain economic effects:
the entrepreneurial force needed for rural development is weakening
and the productivity life of an individual as a family member is reduced.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Public policies that strongly encourage an increase in the birth rate;
providing financial support to foster families;
providing financial support in the process of biomedically assisted fertilization;
a socially responsible policy that will enable economic empowerment of the family through various incentive measures, benefits and subsidies,
special economic empowerment of women, who will have the right to their own property, inheritance, safe and decent employment, equal compensation for work, on a completely equal basis with men;
assistance from the institutions of the system when starting a family business, regardless of the economic sphere from which it is started;
providing equal opportunities for women and men and adequately valuing work in the household, because that work is no easier than work in society;
helping young married couples to solve housing problems by providing favorable loans with the lowest interest rate,
by providing subsidies and various other benefits;
construction of kindergartens and extended stays in compliance with European standards and the possibility for all children to be beneficiaries of them;
construction of day centers for children with disabilities;
assistance to families in a state of social need, by amending existing legal solutions;
strengthening the institutions of the system, which would use their authority to implement a more socially responsible policy in order to suppress and prevent discrimination
and gender-based violence;
zero tolerance towards violence against women, children, old and infirm persons;
changes to the legislative and institutional framework, in order to treat domestic violence as a criminal offense,
and not as a misdemeanor, which would affect the awareness of the abuser, which would lead to the reduction and cessation of domestic violence, which we strive for;
special sanctioning of every form of violence against children, whether in the family, school and society in general;
strict and essential observance of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention and Suppression of Domestic Violence, which Montenegro ratified and thereby undertook to fulfill all the standards prescribed by this Convention;
full respect of the Law on Gender Equality
and enabling greater participation of women in public affairs, in managerial and decision-making positions;
special health care for women as a need to have healthy offspring.
MONTENEGRO NEEDS FACTORIES AND NEW JOBS
Our task:
Development and valorization, not distribution and degradation.
Introduction:
Expertise, professionalism and competence are an integral part of efficient and democratic governance.
In Montenegro, however, the uncontrolled process of changes in ownership, or more specifically, the process of privatization, which turns into the seizure of social wealth and the enrichment of individuals, has been going on for decades.
to satisfy their own interests and the interests of their friends.
Description of the condition:
Montenegro is a country that entered the process of privatization at the end of the last century on the way to transition.
After the changes, the new government faced a dilemma: what to give priority to, legal regulation and development of institutions or privatization at any cost and without delay.
The prevailing opinion was to proceed with privatization immediately and without delay, which had the consequence, in addition to numerous illegalities and anomalies, and catastrophic consequences for the status and fate of production capacities.
Factories changed owners, new owners shut down production, and left workers without work.
The result of this privatization process was the shutdown of production and the shutdown of jobs.
that is, the personal enrichment of the new owners at the expense of the state and citizens of Montenegro, which in the further process was constantly in debt, and brought its citizens to the brink of existence and poverty.
Privatization did not lead to what its mission was - the recovery of companies and their consolidation, but on the contrary, as a result of that process, we have closed factories, tens of thousands of people at the labor office, sold off state property, in short, economic and social wasteland.
Privatization served more as a means to cover one's own failures, which means that the funds obtained on that basis are used to fill the budget and solve social problems, not for recapitalization and recovery of the company.
Instead of factories that were carriers of economic development, today in that locality we have abandoned facilities, dead capital, the absence of new value, strikes by disenfranchised workers who are left to the elements.
A WORKING MONTENEGRO
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Valorization of all strategic resources as a prerequisite for the development of Montenegro;
strategic resources in energy, agriculture, tourism, mineral wealth, will have a responsible owner and will be a prerequisite for a more dynamic development of the state,
and satisfaction of the interests of all citizens of Montenegro;
immediate creation for balanced regional development
which must provide an equal chance for all citizens, regardless of whether they live in the south, north or central part of Montenegro;
connecting production flows as a prerequisite for balanced development, in order to
complemented each other and thus as a whole ensured dynamic and equal development,
which will provide citizens with conditions for normal work and a safe future;
stopping population migration in the north of Montenegro by opening new jobs
bearing in mind that due to lack of concern for the development of the northern part of Montenegro, on the one hand,
and urban chaos in the south, and especially in the central part of Montenegro, where Podgorica leads the way, on the other hand, there was a migration of the population towards the central and coastal regions, which resulted in overpopulation in one part of Montenegro, and the abandonment of homes and property.
Thus, significant resources remained in the north, but the basic resource - man - moved away;
taking concrete measures to restore production and develop small and medium-sized enterprises,
in order to ensure the regulation of the labor market through the implementation of the labor market policy because Montenegro needs factories and new jobs;
- improvement of the labor market policy in order to alleviate unemployment, because it should primarily affect the structure of supply and demand, to improve professional and spatial mobility.
Labor market policy instruments are determined by positive regulations,
and refer primarily to measures within the framework of mediation,
professional counseling,
professional education, professional rehabilitation,
encouraging employment, i.e. creating new jobs;
we will create the conditions for the labor market policy to be exactly the point where social and market policy touch, because in democratic countries these two aspects complement each other and serve a common goal.
Two employment policies, active and passive employment policies, were derived from these goals.
This is not the case in Montenegro today, so the situation is, to put it mildly, unsustainable;
we will affirm an active employment policy as an active measure, and create conditions for social care for the unemployed, i.e. guarantee a passive policy.
In this process, employer-employee relations must be clear and must be regulated and guaranteed by the systemic labor law and collective bargaining.
In the part of the passive employment policy, the partners are the state, ie the Employment Agency, and unemployed workers, where the right to material and legal protection is guaranteed and protected by the passive policy, ie the systemic law on employment, while workers are waiting for employment.
Montenegro is a country with an incredible diversity of natural resources in a geographically small location, which gives it numerous comparative advantages.
Hydro potentials, abundance of water, number of sunny days, soil quality, wide raw material base (forest, ore, tobacco, dairy products and others) allow us to obtain a financial product domestically, which in terms of quality and cost must be extremely competitive on the European market. as it used to be.
The formula for success lies in the creation of new jobs.
Democratic Montenegro has an obligation first of all to its citizens and future generations to return production to its primary place through incentive measures,
subsidizing,
favorable productive lending because the previous two decades represent an example of how the economic genocide of one's own country and its future is carried out.
THE RIGHT TO WORK AND LIVE FROM OWN WORK
Our task:
The right to work must be a reality, not a fiction.
Introduction:
The Constitution of Montenegro defines the right to work as a fundamental right.
Legal work is considered one of the basic relationships characterized by equality and freedom in choosing an occupation and equal right to establish an employment relationship.
When it comes to this principle, it is an important, new, special and specific socio-legal institute that basically permeates all relationships based on the principles of equal availability and equal rights depending on the abilities of each individual and on the negation of each and everyone's right to appropriation outside of work.
MEMBERSHIP WILL NEVER AGAIN BE A REQUIREMENT FOR EMPLOYMENT
Description of the condition:
The situation in Montenegro is alarming.
The right to work is more fiction and wishful thinking than reality.
This right is not a right for everyone, but a right for those individuals who accept, promote and proclaim the political will of the government.
This reality in Montenegro creates disturbances and consequences that negatively reflect on prosperity and development on the one hand,
and the personal insecurity and hopelessness of individuals who have a personal attitude but also an indisputable ability to create and contribute to development and prosperity, on the other hand.
Therefore, the cause of the current state of lagging behind in the development of Montenegro is negative personnel selection
and eliminating those who do not blindly follow the policy of the government.
In the description of the situation, one must not forget the consequences and results of the change of ownership, i.e. the devastation left by the devastating privatization, the consequences of which are disastrous,
especially in the process of losing the right to work.
Those employees who created and built factories, through the demolition and looting of factories, remained on the street.
It is therefore about an army of people who are status and economic victims of the transition.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Efficient economy and dynamic development as a basic assumption for the creation of new jobs
which guarantee productive employment and the right to work as a real, real right and only according to abilities
and never again according to political affiliation, that is, a membership card must never again be a condition for exercising the right to work and employment;
valuing the personnel function as the most important business function because personnel are the carriers of development,
and the personnel function of the development of the human factor in modern conditions becomes a decisive factor of socio-economic development.
We will do everything to make the personnel function a permanent and systematic activity in order to secure the necessary personnel in terms of number and structure in order to create the conditions for the achievement of business goals in economic development.
The modern scientific and technical revolution demands that the personnel function acquires increasing importance;
respect for the principles of legality and development,
equal rights for all,
because only on these postulates is a causal and essential connection of economic and personnel progress and development possible,
proceeding from the fact that these development facts are part of the same process that only in common correlation ensures a progressive and happy society;
maximum commitment to creating conditions for persons with disabilities who will participate equally in prosperity and development,
but also through own training to work on personal and social affirmation;
DECENTRALIZATION AND STRENGTHENING OF LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT
CITIZEN SERVICES
Our task:
Strong, modern, decentralized, development-oriented local self-government at the service of citizens!
Introduction:
Developed local self-government is one of the conditions of democracy and the first instance for solving the needs of citizens.
Local self-government can become efficient and effective in a decentralized system,
because only such a system provides local communities with the opportunity to decide on all issues of direct importance to the life and work of citizens,
but also the possibility of actions and investments at the local level.
Decentralization, especially in the functional sense by increasing the competence of local self-governments,
road infrastructure development,
protection and planned valorization of natural resources are the basis for economic development,
but also stopping large-scale migrations, displacements, or depopulation, especially in the northern part of Montenegro.
Each local self-government has certain comparative advantages that need to be directed properly and enable their valorization in the interest of the citizens of that area through the development of the transport network,
agriculture,
entrepreneurship,
tourism, telecommunications and proper management of natural resources.
The regional policy of the EU implies support for infrastructure development projects,
agriculture,
encouraging the industry of developing countries in order to reduce differences between regions and strengthen the competitiveness of local governments.
Countries that are candidates for EU membership with the aim of reforms on the European path have the option of applying for the above-mentioned funds, which are combined into the Instrument for Pre-Accession Support (IPA).
Significant financing of EU regional policies is also achieved through the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund.
Financial autonomy is one of the preconditions for the development of local self-government,
and thus the overall even development of municipalities in Montenegro.
The financing of local self-government functions requires their certain material and normative independence,
and realistically enforceable revenue collection instruments,
without which there is no organized local self-government and satisfaction of citizens' needs.
Description of the condition:
The lack of funds called into question the performance of the obligations of the largest number of local self-government units, the implementation of their budgets, and thus local economic development.
The original and ceded revenues belonging to the municipalities in accordance with the current legal regulations show that the majority of municipalities are not able to independently provide liquidity,
that is, most local governments are on the list of beneficiaries of the Equalization Fund, which enables the state to maintain financial balance, which cannot be a long-term solution.
The revenues that local self-governments obtain from concession fees for the exploitation of natural resources on their territory are devastating and show a large gap in that area.
The level of debt of a number of municipalities and the logic of conducting economic policy, especially in the area of ​​indebtedness, create grounds for serious concern regarding future implications.
The scope of local self-government is one of the most important issues on which the level of development of local self-government is assessed.
However, contrary to the basic principles of the European Charter on Local Self-Government, instead of decentralization,
the government disavowed the system of local self-government, and through special laws, centralized the affairs under its jurisdiction.
The assemblies of municipalities, the Capital City and the Capital do not have the role and importance that should belong to them as a representative body elected by citizens in direct elections.
The management boards of companies whose founders are local self-governments are usually made up of party representatives for whom this feature is the main recommendation, and therefore they are mostly statistric in their work,
instead of representing the umbrella governing body according to the principles of corporate governance.
This is a part of public finances that essentially no one controls in Montenegro, and on an annual level tens of millions of euros of citizens' funds are spent through their operations.
The low degree of transparency and publicity of work represent major shortcomings in the functioning of numerous local self-governments.
Local communities, as the parent cells of the organization and activities of citizens, essentially do not have the role that belongs to them according to all positive regulations, as well as the European Charter on Local Self-Government.
Instead of being a key intermediary between citizens and local self-governments in solving basic life problems and developing the local area, local communities often represent party branches and passive observers in relation to the function of their organization.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Functional decentralization of government through strengthening local self-governments and restoring their original competences;
an increase in secure source income that will enable the development of local self-government units and the realization of jobs of direct interest to citizens;
establishment of new municipalities that have economic viability;
increasing the competence of local self-governments in the disposal of state property;
strengthening the role and importance of assemblies of city municipalities, assemblies of municipalities, the Capital City and the Capital as an umbrella, representative body of citizens;
the professionalization and independence of management boards of companies that perform public functions,
a much greater degree of publicity of the work,
as well as the insistence that the external audit of the finances of local governments is performed by the State Audit Institution;
strict application of the European Charter on Local Self-Government;
raising the degree of transparency and publicity of the work of local self-governments;
for local communities to be the true "voice" of citizens in order to meet their needs.
BALANCED REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Our task:
Accelerated and effective reduction of differences in the regional development of Montenegro.
Introduction:
One of the most important issues of the macroeconomic policy of any country is its balanced economic development throughout the territory.
One of the important causes of the low level of development of Montenegro is its uneven regional development, i.e. the uneven development of the Northern, Central and Primorsky regions.
The Spatial Plan of Montenegro until 2020, as well as the Law on Regional Development, in accordance with geographical characteristics and distribution of natural conditions for development, define three geographical regions in Montenegro: Coastal, Central and Northern.
The northern region consists of: Andrijevica, Berane, Bijelo Polje, Gusinje, Mojkovac, Kolašin, Petnjica, Plav, Pljevlja, Plužine, Rožaje, Šavnik and Žabljak.
The central region consists of: the capital city of Podgorica, the municipality of Danilovgrad, the municipality of Nikšić and the capital city of Cetinje.
The coastal region consists of: Bar, Budva, Herceg-Novi, Tivat, Kotor, Ulcinj.
The northern region covers 52.8%, the central region covers 35.6%, and the coastal region covers 11.6% of the territory of Montenegro.
From the total number of inhabitants according to the state census from 2011, the largest number of inhabitants is in the Central Region, 293,509 (47.3%), followed by the Northern Region, 177,837 (28.7%), while the Primorsky Region has the smallest number of inhabitants. 148,683 (24.0%).
Description of the condition:
The northern region is geographically the most widespread, but it is characterized by a very low population density.
Due to the difficult economic and social status of the population,
poor road and communal infrastructure,
the industrial wasteland caused by predatory privatization,
the conditions in which local self-governments find themselves,
there is a strong population migration to the central and southern regions, which caused the extremely uncertain future of numerous municipalities in the north of the country.
It is unacceptable that the northern region with all its natural resources in the form of hydro potential, agricultural land, livestock, reserves of coal, zinc, lead, tourism potential is in this state with an inappropriate and stepmotherly attitude of the state for a long period of time.
EQUAL MONTENEGRO
The central region covers slightly more than a third of the total territory of Montenegro, but it is inhabited by close to half of the total population of Montenegro, with a very pronounced influx of population from the northern region and a tendency of constant growth of the influx, especially to the capital Podgorica.
In the past, its development was mainly based on the industrial sector, construction, trade and catering, electricity production,
but also agriculture, especially if we are talking about the fertile Zeta and Bjelopavlić plains.
The transition with all its negative effects that accompanied it and the non-domestic attitude of those who acted on behalf of the state had particularly disastrous consequences for the development of Nikšić and Cetinje due to the destruction and devastation of industry, as an economic branch that was the engine of the development of these municipalities.
The central region is at the same time the university center of Montenegro, the area where the largest part of the young population gravitates.
When it comes to the communal and road infrastructure of the largest part of Nikšić, Cetinje, Danilovgrad and the urban settlements and villages of the capital,
we can freely say that the current state, that is, the level of capital investments, is very far from the level of the cities of developed European countries and the parameters that mean the basic conditions for life in the 21st century.
The coastal region includes practically a tenth of the total territory of Montenegro, and it is inhabited by a quarter of the total population of Montenegro.
Like the central region, it records a significant influx of population from the northern region, but also workers from surrounding countries, especially during the tourist season.
Due to its extraordinary, and internationally recognized, natural potentials, development is based on tourism and hospitality, the maritime economy,
as well as a smaller part of agriculture.
It is considered the most developed part of Montenegro, but also an area where urgent measures are needed, especially in the area of ​​unplanned construction and urbanization.
because the continuation of the current way of acting can have far-reaching consequences in the long term.
Differences in the degree of regional development have reached such a high level that they definitely represent the shackles of Montenegro's development.
Transition, and to a large extent predatory privatization, with its devastating consequences, is present in practically every part of our country.
Closed factories, destroyed industrial giants, disenfranchised workers, sale of state property, devastation and looting of natural resources have made it so that instead of development, in the last decades, we see stagnation and economic stumbling throughout the territory of Montenegro.
However, there is certainly a significant disproportion in regional dimensions, which clearly shows that the northern part of Montenegro is in a much more difficult position by all parameters compared to the central and southern parts of the country.
The economic and social position of citizens, the status of workers, especially the losers of the transition,
state of industrial production,.
traffic infrastructure
clearly show that urgent measures and capital investments are a condition for the survival of citizens in the north, stopping the depopulation that leads to the metropolitanization of Montenegro in the form of accelerated and uncontrolled settlement of Podgorica and certain municipalities on the coast
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Balanced regional development as a strategic priority of Montenegro and a condition for economic recovery and prosperity of particularly devastated areas;
legal changes that will enable a greater fiscal intervention in the relevant part of local self-government revenues;
valorization of natural resources in the interest of local self-governments on whose territory they are located
and prevention of lawlessness and robbery in this area;
increasing capital investments, especially taking into account the north of the country and traffic infrastructure as the basis of regional development;
much larger allocations from the Budget for the agro-budget and the development of entrepreneurship;
tax incentives for employers who create new jobs in underdeveloped municipalities;
encouraging more effective cooperation between local governments and EU institutions both in the field of education,
as well as the use of funds from EU funds for regional policy;
affirmation of natural resources,
regional and local cultures,
their differences and specificities as types of tourist offer.
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
Our task:
New public management - from government to management!
Introduction:
MORE ECONOMIC AND EFFICIENT PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
The quality of life of citizens in modern countries depends on the knowledge, skills, efficiency, loyalty and morals on the basis of which the public administration performs its duties and achieves the goals entrusted to it on behalf of the citizens.
Public administration, due to its position in the structure of state power and the social role it performs in direct relation with citizens, can be an engine of overall social development, but also a brake on the economic prosperity of the state.
During the last decades, the role of public administration as the initiator and executor of various policies that solve concrete social problems has been increasingly affirmed.
Since there are always more problems that need to be solved than the means that can be used for it, the prevailing tendency is for public administration to be an adequate combination of efficient and economical.
Public administration must be organized so that it provides services to all citizens and legal entities in the most up-to-date and economical way, because that is the basic purpose of its existence.
while the European concept and standard of public sector management must become ours as well.
Description of the condition:
A party state, that is, a state in which there is a sign of equality between the party and the institution of the system, blocks the development and modernization of society and the state.
It speaks of superficial democratization, which does not reach the rule of law and the establishment of institutional frameworks at the essential level.
There are some efforts to establish them, but they are mostly unsuccessful, because hidden alliances of political and economic elites make it impossible to establish institutional control that would eliminate the exchange of influence, power and money.
The equality of the party, the state and business, that is, their connection of interests, means the impossibility of applying the law.
In Montenegro, there is no rule of law as a basis for equality and the creation of legal security for the individual, but also for the entire society.
which is the basic prerequisite of social, economic and political development.
Public administration in Montenegro is significantly oversized,
proverbially ineffective,
with an insufficient level of professionalism,
and a high degree of corruption and nepotism.
The key obligation of the public administration, which mandates that the service be easily accessible to citizens and the economy, has not taken root.
As a necessary necessity, increasing the efficiency of management in the public sector is imposed,
that is, complicated administrative procedures need to be reduced and simplified.
Employment in the public administration takes place to a significant extent on the basis of party affiliation.
Vertical and horizontal advancement (transfer to another body) is mostly indirectly dependent on the decisions of party bodies.
The public administration in Montenegro, which is limited by rules, oriented on procedures and procedures, focused on inputs and not on results, must be replaced in the future by an administration that will be shaped according to citizens, that is, focused on results and not on procedures.
For these reasons, public administration must change so that it becomes flexible, innovative, capable of solving citizens' problems.
In support of the negative qualification of public management is the fact that to a large extent the boards of directors are occupied by individuals who are hired not for their professional qualities, but for their party affiliation.
Individuals hired by party affiliation, simply put, are guests on the board of directors.
and in such conditions it is almost impossible to professionalize managers, which would mean identifying problems and taking measures to improve the company's work, i.e. performing a control mechanism due to the absence of a supervisory board
In contrast to developed countries with a market economy, where there is permanent concern in the parliament for the quality of corporate management, the work of auditors and accountants, this is not the case in Montenegro.
Montenegro would have to establish such a body that would analyze the process of corporate governance and make proposals for its improvement.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Enactment of the Law on the Government of Montenegro, which would establish rights and obligations, define the organization and number of ministries in accordance with the size and number of the population of Montenegro;
formation of a modern, functional, efficient and economical Government of Montenegro;
new public management that will reflect the apolitical and business orientation of public administration;
enactment of a law that would establish a quality organization and raise the quality of protection and rights of citizens, businesses and other entities,
rationality, efficiency and responsibility;
increasing the efficiency of public administration by reducing and simplifying cumbersome and complicated administrative procedures;
Boards of directors as umbrella management bodies in companies will be a reflection of expertise, competence and impartiality,
and not the degree of quality of party work, which is to the greatest extent a reflection of their structures in the current composition;
applying the principles of strategic management (strategic management);
undertaking measures to raise the quality of corporate management, the work of accountants and auditors;
employment of citizens in public administration based on the principle of professional knowledge and expertise.
HEALTHY FOOD, RICH VILLAGE, MODERN AGRICULTURE
Our task:
Modern agriculture as a strategic branch of development, modern agricultural production, rich countryside, healthy food.
Introduction:
The state of agricultural production in Montenegro today is worrisome.
A country that has the second largest area of ​​agricultural land per capita in Europe, a country that has an abundance of sunshine, fertile land and large reserves of clean and drinking water cannot and must not allow the import of food and agricultural products to make up more than 80% of the population's total needs .
It should be added that the state does not find a solution to obtain 17,000 hectares of the most fertile land in Europe through the regulation of the waters of Lake Skadar.
as well as the fact that immeasurable amounts of ecological fertilizer lie in the same locality, the so-called peat that is not used in agricultural production.
By draining these areas, the lowland shores of Lake Skadar and the population would be protected from frequent floods and disasters.
Description of the condition:
Today, despite the fact that it leads the way in terms of available resources, which constitute all the prerequisites for the development of agriculture and the production of healthy food, Montenegro is still an underdeveloped agricultural country.
Montenegro imports more than 80% of agricultural products from the total needs of the population.
The Montenegrin village is mostly neglected, and the agricultural estate is abandoned.
The fate of Montenegrin villages is shared by the north of the country as a whole.
Namely, the villages in the north of Montenegro are mostly destroyed and only elderly households can be found who cannot even take care of themselves, let alone the development of agriculture and animal husbandry.
COMPETITIVE MONTENEGRO
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Preservation of existing resources and their rational use
with constant prevention and the polluter's obligation to pay for the damage he has done;
we will preserve not only healthy production but also water resources, significant supplies of drinking spring water, land, rich flora and fauna, forests and other wealth for generations to come;
effective protection of a healthy environment,
as a human right that in addition
international law is protected by the laws and the Constitution of Montenegro;
we will ensure that agriculture represents an important development branch of the economy and that this importance must be increasing.
The guarantee for this understanding of accelerated development and modernization in the agriculture of Montenegro is a favorable climate, preserved agricultural land, plenty of clean water in the southern and central parts, plenty of sun, and in the north a suitable climate for traditional production;
further cooperation with neighboring Albania,
and with the use of European funds, let's complete the regulation of the waters of Lake Skadar, so that Montenegro will get 17,000 hectares of the most fertile land,
and permanently protect the population from frequent floods that endanger not only property, but also the lives of citizens;
incentive measures of the state and greater security and certainty in the purchase of agricultural products and their export to the European and world markets;
by increasing the agricultural budget, we will encourage greater and more diverse production through seed selection and enrichment of the soil with the necessary ingredients.
Adequate education of agricultural producers must be improved,
as well as the training of specialist personnel
and urgent engagement and employment of agricultural engineers and other personnel from the records of the employment office;
organizing efficient and professional advisory services and meeting the needs of agricultural farms on a market basis (organized protection and others);
we will ensure that the Faculty of Biotechnology gets a chance to study and monitor the improvement and protection of agricultural production from a scientific and professional perspective;
we will stop the import lobby that destroys our agricultural producer, demotivates him and causes the increase of uncultivable agricultural areas;
we will abolish the taxation of arable agricultural land,
help producers protect and insure their crops
and with numerous incentive measures and efforts of competent authorities to ensure an increase in exports and imports of domestic products on the Montenegrin market.
TRAFFIC AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Our task:
Safe, secure, modern, modern traffic infrastructure.
Introduction:
Traffic is an indicator of socio-economic development.
Transport policy is part of the overall economic policy of a country and represents a synthesis of public interests in the field of transport
and an important integral part of social activities in the field of country development.
The traffic policy directly affects the development of traffic, determines the steps on that path and indicates priorities.
A rational and consistent policy for the development of certain modes of transport contributes to economic prosperity and
enables efficient use of funds from the state budget to increase the quality of traffic and an instrument for efficient management of traffic infrastructure,
which can also be seen as an instrument for balanced regional development and strengthening of the territorial integrity of the state.
Transport investments are capital intensive.
The transport system must be viewed as a whole in which all branches are complementary and compatible, not competitive.
The goal of the transport policy of Montenegro should be the development of the transport system based on the concept of "sustainable" development and
the so-called comprehensive planning, which will be characterized by efficiency with high quality of services,
optimal security,
lower costs and as little negative overall impact on the environment as possible.
Description of the condition:
The traffic position in the entire Montenegrin system is inferior.
The field of traffic in the state of Montenegro should be viewed through two dominant aspects: quality of life and overall economic development.
No development strategy of Montenegro can be realized without improvement and
modernization of the traffic system.
Transport connectivity can be divided into intraregional (within the region), interregional (between regions) and external (external - with the environment).
When it comes to intra-regional connectivity in Montenegro, it can be stated that the situation is very bad,
because comprehensive reconstructions of road routes are not approached, but reconstructions are reduced to repairs aimed at short-term improvement of roads.
When it comes to the transportation of passengers, most often we can talk about disorganization.
It is a vivid fact that Podgorica is one of the few, if not the only, capital city in the civilized world that does not have organized city transport through a company founded by the local self-government.
DEVELOPED MONTENEGRO
Most of the regional roads are in very bad condition.
Examples include: Bioče-Mateševo, Mateševo-Andrijevica, Mioska-Savnik, Plužine-Trsa-Žabljak, Mojkovac-Đurđevića Tara, Virpazar-Ostros-Vladimir.
Main roads in Montenegro can best be characterized as unsafe.
In recent years, a number of critical points have been rehabilitated, but the main road Podgorica-Kolašin can still be said to be a high-risk road.
The main road that connects Plužine with the border of Bosnia and Herzegovina is also in a very bad condition, as is the Rožaje-Mehov krs road.
The high-frequency main road Cetinje-Budva, especially in the section from Obzovica to Budva, from the aspect of increasing its safety, has long been ready for serious reconstruction.
Montenegro is the only country in southwestern Europe that does not have a single meter of highway.
The start of construction of the Bar-Boljare highway was pompously announced as early as September 2009.
Montenegro has one of the slowest railways in Europe.
The long-announced reconstruction of the Belgrade-Bar railway as an interstate project of Montenegro and Serbia has not been realized, except for certain short sections.
There are no serious plans to rebuild the railway from Nikšić to Čapljina and Podgorica towards Shkodër.
During the transition period, Montenegro almost destroyed its naval fleet, which is unacceptable for a maritime state.
This is particularly problematic from the point of view of employment of domestically educated maritime personnel.
As for air transport, the only national airline has created huge debts, which is a consequence of uncontrolled, irresponsible and incompetent management.
Citizens of Montenegro continue to pay very high prices for air transportation, especially to destinations in the region of Southwestern Europe.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Full focus and taking active measures to ensure that land, air and maritime transport reach European Union standards in this area as soon as possible,
especially bearing in mind that tourism is a strategic branch of the development of Montenegro;
priority capital investments in the form of the construction of the Bar-Boljare highway,
of the Adriatic-Ionian highway, the completion of the Podgorica-Gusinje highway construction,
construction of bypasses around all larger urban settlements, especially in coastal municipalities;
completion of the modernization and reconstruction of the Bar-Belgrade railway line,
modernization and capacity expansion of Golubovci and Tivat airports,
expanding the capacity of existing ports while taking into account environmental protection and tourism development, as well as the creation of a national maritime company;
creation of a sustainable and efficient system of maintenance of existing roads and their modernization in order to increase the safety of existing road routes,
construction of new regional and main roads with the aim of balanced regional development and creation of conditions for raising the level of competitiveness of the traffic market;
organized city transport through a company whose founder is the local self-government.
TOURISM
Our task:
Montenegro is a tourist attraction, a country where guests come and are happy to return!
Introduction:
MONTENEGRO'S CHANCE
Montenegro is one of the most beautiful tourist destinations in the Mediterranean, with the presence of tourism for more than 80 years, while we can talk about tourism as a mass phenomenon going back 60 years.
Since then, tourism has been one of the most important generators of economic development in Montenegro.
The early stage of the development of Montenegrin tourism is characterized by several stages, the first of which is from 1964 until the devastating earthquake in 1979, which is marked by the construction of basic tourist facilities along with the accompanying infrastructure.
This is the period in which tourism contributed the most to the development and prosperity of Montenegro.
The second phase in the development of our tourism refers to the period after the earthquake until 1991.
The fact that most of the hotel capacities in Montenegro were filled by guests from the foreign market is characteristic of this period.
The third phase is the so-called sanction and transition tourism, which changed its appearance in several ways and whose individual elements we have until today.
In the structure of overnight stays by foreign tourists, in 2014, the most overnight stays were achieved by tourists from Russia (30.0%), Serbia (24.0%), Bosnia and Herzegovina (7.5%), Ukraine (5.8%) etc. , and revenues from tourism in the previous year amounted to over 800 million euros.
Description of the condition:
The problems faced by Montenegrin tourism are not new and were noted twenty years ago, and some of them are:
seasonal nature of tourist traffic,
traffic connection and
lack of modern communications (highways),
seasonal employment,
the presence of the gray economy and many others.
The current government has not done much to rehabilitate them despite the adopted normative framework for the development of tourism, which includes the Spatial Plan, General Plan and many detailed urban plans by municipalities.
Due to excessive construction, Budva has damaged the ambience of the Mediterranean area, and "concreting" has spread to numerous parts of the Budva municipality.
Petrovac, as one of the tourist jewels, has been brought to the position of being constantly faced with dramatic floods after heavy rainfall due to excessive and unplanned construction.
Herceg Novi, Kotor and Ulcinj paid for bad privatizations, that is, they were left without significant hotel capacities.
We have completely neglected auto-camps, while, for example, Istria in Croatia is intensively renovating this type of tourism.
There is no planned approach to the creation of personnel for the tourism industry, so non-residents represent a very significant workforce in tourism.
When we look at the north, except to some extent for Žabljak and Kolašin, the other cities have a very limited offer, primarily in the form of a lack of capacity and adequate standards,
although they also have great potential for the development of both winter and summer tourism.
Road infrastructure is a big problem.
When we talk about the coast, we first of all think of the Adriatic highway, which was built in the 60s and which in a significant part does not meet the conditions necessary for a country that is pleading to be an attractive tourist destination.
Cruising tourism is significant for Montenegro.
Kotor is a destination that is among the top 10 destinations in terms of passenger traffic, and this year 420 ships will bring around 400,000 passengers.
The Porto Montenegro, Porto Novi, Luštica Bay projects, in addition to certain positive effects they certainly have on the system, can become extraterritorial areas with the intention that tourists do not use services outside the tourist complex at all, avoiding even that their investors use and promote the name of the city in whose territory they are located .
At the same time, it is not possible to record the number and type of guests, and obligations to the state are not paid because they are registered as a project (eg membership contribution to a tourist organization).
The Law on National Parks and the Law on Marine Resources did not produce even close to the desired results, and although adopted a long time ago,
The master plan for the development of tourism until 2020 does not correspond to the set goals, which will be important inputs for the development of a new master plan for the period until 2030.
The main problems in the development of tourism arise from poor planning and illegal construction.
Classic land speculation is present in the coastal area of ​​Montenegro, which is carried out through the manipulation of spatial plans, with the desire to increase the value of the land under the guise of implementing "developmental tourism projects" on green areas overnight, through the combination of local and state authorities with unscrupulous investors. when it becomes the property of privileged individuals.
In this way, enormous economic damage is caused to the public interest,
and privileged individuals reach fabulous wealth.
Some Mediterranean countries (eg France) responded to this negative phenomenon by introducing the so-called positional rents as a control mechanism for protecting space from misuse.
Construction during the tourist season is present despite the ban in effect from June 15 to September 15.
Weaknesses in the development of tourism are also reflected in the insufficient diversity of the tourist offer, the professionalism and competence of the staff, the planned approach to the duration of the tourist season, the underutilization of numerous tourist gems on the entire territory of our country.
In short, the race for short-term profit is often faster than the quality of long-term tourism development, which causes significant consequences for future processes.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Adoption of the Tourism Development Strategy of Montenegro for the period until 2030;
development of rural, cultural, religious, ecotourism, sports tourism (example of Antalya, Turkey),
which represents a trend in the world that is reflected in new tourist offers;
improvement of the tourist offer based on the "sun and sea" holiday, which certainly dominates, the development of rural tourism, monastery tours, wine tours, fishing at sea, rivers, lakes and numerous other contents that will enrich the overall tourist offer of Montenegro;
improving cruise tourism, by building pylons and making safety connections for ships in Kotor,
as well as by opening the Port of Bar for cruise ships, where visits to Bar, Ulcinj, as well as Lake Skadar would have the opportunity to promote this part of our country through excursion tourism;
formation of coordinating bodies at the level of coastal municipalities and key tourist municipalities in the north, which would be in charge of monitoring the tourist season,
timely response and problem solving in communication with the competent Ministry;
registration of foreigners' residence must be regular, simple and fast
because now we have a selective and very bad record that causes dissatisfaction and resentment among tourists;
The maritime domain must be more rigorous in its criteria when announcing a tender for the lease of bathing areas with precise obligations and provision of a control system;
the ban on construction works from June 15 to September 15 must be substantial, not just formal;
- reform of the system of tourist organizations;
due to the need for adequate monitoring of the tourist season, significant investments are needed in: the Protection and Rescue Service, the Port Authority, the Maritime Safety Administration, the Naval Unit of the Police, utility companies;
establishment of tourist clinics to provide medical assistance to tourists whose services will be free of charge, i.e. at the expense of the state;
introduction of mandatory and continuous education for all employees in tourism;
connecting tourism with domestic local food producers;
public administration reform,
to make it easier for tourism investors to enter the market;
building hotel capacities, especially in those cities where this has been a necessary need for many years;
a significantly higher degree of investment in transport infrastructure as a prerequisite for the development of tourism.
WATER MANAGEMENT AND FORESTRY
Our task:
Stop the irresponsible attitude of the state towards our forests, watercourses, rivers and lakes!
Introduction:
The potential of rivers and lakes in Montenegro is exceptional and constitutes an invaluable resource for the further development of Montenegro.
Management of these resources by the state through granting concessions to irresponsible concessionaires
and the unauthorized exploitation of gravel and sand have devastated our rivers and the shores of Lake Skadar to such an extent that it cannot be said that we are talking about the rivers, that is, the shores of part of Lake Skadar,
but about neglected and destroyed space.
Description of the condition:
The condition and management of our forests is extremely bad.
Uncontrolled exploitation, theft, fires and unprecedented devastation are our reality.
Both in one and in the other case, the concession fees are insignificant,
and the enrichment of individuals is uncontrolled and inappropriate.
So, today the situation in water management and forestry, the protection of rivers and lakes and the protection of forests is in such a state that it cannot be tolerated or postponed any further.
If it is added that the management of these resources by companies and irresponsible individuals has elements of illegal behavior, i.e. elements of crime and corruption,
we can only talk about an unsustainable situation extremely harmful for the further development of Montenegro.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Decisive stopping of uncontrolled exploitation and devastation of forests, gravel and sand from river beds and shores of Lake Skadar and other areas where natural resources are exploited;
determining the responsibility and compensation of all those who contributed to this state of affairs;
immediate control of the exploitation of forests, sand and gravel;
the wealth of forests and gravel reserves will be one of the strong financial sources for accelerated development, especially in northern Montenegro;
protection and provision of conditions for restoration and improvement, so that forests are not further threatened,
both through irrational use and processing,
as well as biological threats due to the spread of diseases and pests;
stopping the hitherto uncontrolled export of unprocessed wood;
determination of the current state of forests in state and private ownership
, defining the system of forest use planning and control,
prevention of illegal cutting of forests and preventive actions to suppress forest fires;
we will provide a unique information system in forestry.
We will work on staff training, especially in forest management planning and protection,
as well as the equipment of institutions engaged in research and development activities in forestry.
stopping uncontrolled, and establishing planned exploitation of gravel and sand,
remediation of the existing situation
and clear definition of the area of ​​intervention from which it can be exploited;
strict control of all types of exploitation and provision of a system of awarding concessions exclusively to concessionaires who have not violated the law and the basic principles of protection of riverbanks and the shores of Lake Skadar and the ecology of these areas.
SCIENCE AND EDUCATION
Our task:
Montenegro must become a state of knowledge.
THE STATE OF KNOWLEDGE
Introduction:
Striving for a knowledge-based society, science deserves special, thoughtful and continuous care.
Scientific research activity is an activity of public interest,
and the task of the state is: to promote creative activity on scientific discoveries,
to refer to the use and application of the results of science,
to create better conditions for the training and improvement of researchers for scientific research work and enable their connection at the national level,
as well as create conditions for their integration on a global scale.
An adequate educational system is a prerequisite for the successful economic development of the country.
the construction of truly modern social values ​​and
a better standard of living for all citizens of a country.
Montenegro, pupils, students and parents want better, more efficient and modern education and we have to provide it.
Laws must not maintain the status quo, but be in the function of improving the overall education system in accordance with the needs of our country and our citizens.
Substantial changes in the education system are very necessary, as this is a prerequisite for a complete national reform.
World standards that dominate the education system must also become Montenegrin,
because the state must not work against the interests of young people and their future.
Description of the condition:
The state of science in Montenegro is very bad, primarily due to insufficient state investment in scientific research.
In 2012, Montenegro opened and temporarily closed chapter 25-Science and research in negotiations with the EU.
The main complaint during the negotiations was insufficient state investment in this area.
At that moment, the investment amounted to 0.43% of GDP, with the promise of Montenegro that in the next three years that percentage will increase to 1.4%.
The Lisbon strategy and the "Europe 2020" strategy defined the goal that investment in scientific research activity should amount to at least 3% of GDP at the national level.
In recent years, higher education institutions have neglected scientific research activities, focusing on gaining financial profit by enrolling a large number of self-financed students.
The exhaustion of the economy in Montenegro, caused by a misguided privatization policy that was exclusively focused on the enormous enrichment of the ruling elite
it led to the complete death of scientific research activity in that sphere.
The politics of division, which the ruling elite persistently insists on, was not absent in this area either.
There is an insufficient number of institutions whose main activity is scientific research,
and there are no adequate plans and programs based on the development needs of Montenegro for the establishment of new ones and the creation of better, more modern conditions for the work of existing ones.
The phenomenon of plagiarism of scientific works and the unwillingness to sanction such phenomena are particularly worrying.
By analyzing the complete educational system in Montenegro, pre-school, primary, secondary, higher education, lifelong education and education of national minorities, we determined that there are the following problems:
the construction of new educational institutions and investment in school equipment is neglected;
the constitutional principle of free primary education is not respected;
the amount of tuition paid by students and other student expenses are not in accordance with the standard of living of students and their parents;
a large number of low-quality and inadequate school literature, which forces pupils and students to master material that is not usable in the classroom;
violence in school institutions at all levels of education is the result of the lack of an educational element in education
and disturbed social values ​​throughout Montenegro;
lack of creativity in the organization of classes and practical activities for pupils and students in almost all educational institutions;
inappropriate influence of politics during the selection of school personnel;
- high school education is optional;
the criteria and conditions that the student must fulfill in the pre-examination and examination obligations differ from professor to professor and from faculty to faculty, therefore the conditions for studying and taking exams differ in all higher education institutions in Montenegro;
many faculties do not respect the Bologna system of education;
Montenegro does not take enough care of minorities even in terms of their education, especially in the area of ​​education of the Roma population;
educational staff are poorly paid, and their existence is reduced to mere survival.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Increasing budgetary investment in science and research;
- encouragement of the economy to invest in research and development projects;
investments in modernizing the work of scientific research institutes and centers and establishing new ones in accordance with the development needs of Montenegro;
management of the enrollment policy in accordance with the requirements of the labor market
with recommendation and encouragement to higher education institutions for scientific and research activity;
investing in young scientists, which, among other things, prevents "brain drain" and
at the same time, it provides the personnel base for adequate replacement of older scientific personnel;
creating a normative and institutional framework for a decisive fight against plagiarism of scientific works;
defining the national strategy for the complete education system in the country,
made by competent individuals and teams from this field;
providing a legal presumption that will enable the realization of the student's obligations to be only a function of his education, and not the arbitrariness of professors and attempts to build a dubious authority among the student population;
the construction of new educational institutions in those areas in Montenegro, where it is necessary, as well as the modernization of existing ones;
allocating more financial resources to finance education,
provision of adequate school equipment and
increasing the standard of living of school staff, because investment in education is not consumption but investment;
we will ensure the strict application of the constitutional principle of free primary education and in this way relieve the financial allocation of parents to finance the education of their children;
in addition to primary and secondary education, education must be mandatory and aimed at the production of the staff that is necessary for Montenegro and its citizens at the state and local level;
we will provide the conditions for budgetary financing of as many students as possible;
the legal assumptions and practice regarding the education of the Roma population should be radically changed and adequate conditions should be provided for the education of this sensitive category of residents, because they are the ones who need this kind of help the most;
we will adjust the amount of tuition that students pay at state colleges to the standard of living of students and their parents;
curricula must be adapted to the needs of pupils and students;
the literature used at all levels of education must be such as to ensure the acquisition of applicable knowledge,
while practical teaching will serve the purpose of easier mastering of the material;
never again will politics and political affiliation influence the choice of school staff, but staff will be chosen according to their own professional and organizational abilities;
holders of executive power and representatives of other state institutions will not favor any university in Montenegro,
but everyone will function according to equal conditions, and in accordance with the positive legal regulations in our country;
the Bologna system of education will be applied in all faculty units and by all professors, so that all students will fulfill the same pre-exam and exam obligations, which will not depend on the professor's affinity, but on the education system;
we will provide all the conditions so that the best students of our universities do not leave their own country, but that their knowledge and skills are in the function of the development of the country, its institutions, economy and citizens.
E-CRNA GORA
Our task
Montenegro will be at the service of those for whom it exists, its citizens.
Introduction:
The Internet and electronic media are a special source of global information and a way of life for citizens, especially young generations.
The state should take all measures to raise this segment of public information and information literacy to a higher level.
State administration and local government bodies must be equipped with the most modern information systems,
and state and local officials fully computer-trained to manage these systems
as well as for timely and objective information and provision of services to citizens at all levels of organization.
Electronic administration refers to the efficient use of information and communication technologies in the exchange of information and the provision of services in the work of state bodies and institutions with citizens and legal entities, as well as for the provision of services between state bodies themselves.
The existence of E-administration implies a completely new technological approach in the work of state administration bodies and local self-government,
as well as the redistribution of competences so that state bodies and public services are fully concentrated on providing public services to individuals and legal entities,
which achieves far greater efficiency of the bureaucracy and optimization of the work of the state administration, which protects the rights of natural and legal persons.
In this way, procedures are simplified, transparency increases,
shortens the time needed to process, deliver and receive information,
reduce the operating costs of state and local authorities and the costs of citizens as users of their services,
all of which leads to an increase in efficiency in the work of the entire state at all levels of its organization.
One of the most important reasons for the introduction of e-administration is the constant increase in the number of inhabitants,
and the question arises as to how many civil servants should be employed in state and local bodies in the foreseeable future so that the administration can effectively and timely provide services to citizens and legal entities,
and that in this sense there would be a drastic increase in the work costs of state administration bodies, huge crowds at the counters, administrative burden and unnecessary waste of citizens' time, thus reducing their own productivity.
Description of the condition:
Internet and other communication technology are still not available in the majority of rural and suburban areas in Montenegro.
Montenegro is characterized by insufficient standardization and coordination of information systems in government bodies,
personnel incompetence,
and the absence of all official records in electronic form, which is the basis for the development of E-administration.
E-state in the service of citizens in Montenegro has not taken off and does not facilitate the work and actions of state administration bodies, nor does it facilitate the provision of services to citizens.
Citizens of Montenegro still do not receive personal documents at their address via computer, but this service still functions through postal document delivery services.
Spending of state money in Montenegro is not transparent and accessible to citizens via the Internet within the E-government system.
There are no single databases on the expenditure of financial resources at the state level, nor at the level of local self-governments.
All data and information of public importance are not available on official internet presentations of public administration bodies.
In Montenegro, there is no single database of ministries, customs administration, tax administration, courts, public companies, local self-government bodies and public services.
Registration is required for every action that the user of the service wishes to perform via the Internet in connection with state administration bodies.
In Montenegro, the unified register of companies provides only basic data and information about registered legal entities.
There is no database on the success of specific public and private companies, and it often happens that individuals and legal entities do business with fictitious or unprofitable companies.
In Montenegro, there is no single electronic identification card for citizens.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
MONTENEGRO AT THE SERVICE OF THE CITIZENS
Financially sustainable and functional state administration.
Reforms in this sector must lead to a reduction in the operating costs of the entire state apparatus
and increasing the quality of providing services to citizens and legal entities;
urgent review of the organization of state administration bodies,
the transfer of certain jobs that can be performed outside the state administration,
and re-examination of the rationality of carrying out certain tasks that should have already been abolished;
all data and information of public importance will be available to all citizens of Montenegro,
without discrimination and registration on the websites of state authorities;
education of employees of state administration bodies, local administration bodies, public services and public companies in the field of working with computers, information systems and the way E-government works will be provided as a priority
so that they could perform their duties independently and efficiently and contribute to the more successful work of E-administration in Montenegro.
Internet access will be provided to all populated places in Montenegro
and the E-government system according to conditions that apply to all citizens of Montenegro;
we will ensure that every citizen of Montenegro has an electronic identification card that will allow him unhindered access to all E-government systems without the usual registration.
In this way, every citizen will have easy access to all public administration services.
With the help of an electronic identification card, citizens will be able to exercise other rights, which until now have been secured through administrative means;
we will provide a unique database of business entities in Montenegro, which will be available to the citizen, with all information about the registered legal entity,
which will enable each legal entity or business partner to see whether the specific entity is financially solvent and whether it fulfills all legally prescribed obligations;
we will provide a unique database of all public administration bodies, so that the interested subject does not have to wander from one institution to another, in order to realize his rights defined by the Constitution and laws.
Confidentiality of personal data will be ensured;
we will make it possible for every citizen to have an insight into the manner of spending financial resources from the state budget and the budget of local self-government units via the Internet;
all pages of the E-government service and official pages of state bodies, local self-government bodies, public services and public companies will be adapted to persons with disabilities.
EURO-ATLANTIC INTEGRATION
Our task:
Citizens' will comes first!
Introduction:
Population, territory, sovereign state power
. The existence of each of these three constitutive elements of the state individually, and most likely all three together, would be put at risk if defense and security were not taken into account.
Therefore, the policy and strategy of the defense and security of the state must not be the product of hasty moves, inspired by the particular interests of any individual or group of people, which, at a certain moment, the government decides to exercise, but a carefully considered solution of the most intelligent and expert members of the social community, which would move in the coordinates of the popular will.
Montenegro, due to its size, geographical position, historical experiences and political circumstances, must pay extra attention and show extra sensibility in making decisions regarding the direction in which its defense and security strategy is being developed.
This is because the territorial integrity, state sovereignty and security of citizens are not threatened by traditional and conventional threats in recent times, but by the whole spectrum of modern scourges - terrorism, cybercrime, organized crime at the internal and international level, natural disasters and disaster as a result of climate change and global warming.
Description of the condition:
Montenegro, through its representatives in the legislative and executive authorities, through a series of adopted documents, decided to be part of the regional and international security systems, so, in accordance with its determination, as a priority, it set its strategic goal - to in the shortest possible time become a full member of NATO, the North Atlantic Military Alliance,
whose members, as stated in the act by which it was founded (North Atlantic Treaty, 1949), want to encourage stability and improvement in the North Atlantic area and unite their efforts for common defense and maintenance of peace and security.
To be honest, this goal of the highest state authorities is not supported by the majority of the citizens of Montenegro.
On the contrary.
Nevertheless, the will of the people, which in this matter does not match at least the declaratively expressed desire of those in power,
until now, it has not been an obstacle for this ruling group to present its personal interests as state interests,
whereby anyone who even thinks that the best for his country can be in some other solution, would be labeled as an enemy of the state.
In this way, for the umpteenth time, already divided citizens are being openly polarized, on whose divisions the government has ruled for more than a quarter of a century.
Recognizing this intention, Democratic Montenegro will not fall into this perfidious trap, nor, by putting this issue in the focus of its activities, will it contribute to this plan of redistributing our citizens, who are expected to forget about all the life problems they face every day.
However, the people gathered in Democratic Montenegro cannot help but notice the tasteless campaigns to gain support for the option that this government has been unsuccessfully imposing for a long time.
YOU CHOOSE, YOU DECIDE
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Democratic Montenegro is determined that the advantages and disadvantages of Montenegro's accession to the NATO alliance should be brought closer to the citizens, predominantly by organizations that are politically impartial,
and by its way of operation and the motives of its establishment, focused on presenting to citizens, on the one hand, the advantages of military neutrality (disadvantages of joining NATO), and on the other hand, the advantages of joining the NATO alliance (disadvantages of military neutrality).
The mentioned organizations should be provided with the same financial resources and the same media space, so that they can participate in this process on a completely equal basis.
Democratic Montenegro believes that politics should be excluded from this process, and the profession should be included, because this is a key prerequisite for the referendum not to divide the citizens of Montenegro on this issue, regardless of its outcome.
Due to the sensitivity of this issue, commitment to the highest democratic standards, among which the supreme place is occupied by "Vox populi - vox dei", but also with the primary goal of respecting the Constitution of Montenegro,
Democratic Montenegro is undoubtedly determined to consult citizens on this issue by organizing a referendum, where they would be asked to answer a clear and non-suggestive question: "Are you in favor of Montenegro becoming a full member of NATO?"
The answer to this question, which (does it even need to be said) should be binding for all future state representatives, regardless of which party they come from or what a priori attitude they have towards it, is the most reliable way to conduct the defense and security policy of our country. .
Any other solution, which would not correspond to the directly expressed will of the citizens (holders of sovereignty), could lead to their dissatisfaction and destabilization of circumstances, which, in the end, would not suit anyone, least of all the citizens themselves.
HOUSING POLICY
Our task:
The satisfaction of basic life needs to be based on the principle of human dignity.
Introduction:
"The right to a home" is defined in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The amended European Social Charter states that "everyone has the right to an apartment", while the European Housing Charter treats this right as an integral component of the European social model and as a key segment of social integration.
At the same time, the current Constitution defines Montenegro as a "welfare state" responsible for "establishing social justice", which implies that the satisfaction of basic life needs should be based on the principle of human dignity.
Description of the condition:
The right to an apartment as a living space is an elementary human right,
and at the same time a basic need of every human being because the realization of all other human needs is conditioned by the apartment and living conditions.
After privatizing almost the entire socially owned housing fund at symbolic prices in the early nineties, the state left the solution of its citizens' housing needs to the elements of the market, refusing to return itself to the position of creator and leader of housing policy.
Because of this, today Montenegro is faced with an unsolved housing need of a large number of households which, due to economic, social and other limitations, cannot satisfy this need on the market.
Despite the fact that in Montenegro the number of apartments exceeds the number of households, it is below the EU average in relation to the number of inhabitants (350 apartments per 1000 inhabitants compared to 450 in the EU), which confirms that the access of households to the realization of this elementary right is impossible.
among other things, the absence of a defined public interest in the area of ​​housing and the absence of state intervention.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
THE RIGHT TO A HOME FOR EVERYONE
It is necessary to define the public interest in the area of ​​housing and to position in it the right of every citizen to a roof over his head, and to establish the appropriate standard of housing by laws and by-laws.
The state must accept the obligation of intervention, which will, without discrimination, facilitate access to the right to housing for all households that, due to economic, social and other reasonable restrictions, cannot satisfy their housing needs on the market.
Forms of state intervention include a comprehensive and broad platform of action:
from supporting the construction of apartments from public funds so that these apartments will have protected or controlled rents,
through subsidies for tenants of privately owned apartments and protection against uncontrolled rent increases,
and the legal regulation of giving notice or terminating the lease.
State intervention in the domain of housing in developed European economies amounts to 3-5% of the gross national product, and the share of housing in the public sector is between 25% (Sweden, Germany, Great Britain) and 35% (Netherlands).
Almost 70% of apartments in Vienna are owned by the city;
it is necessary as soon as possible to establish a National Social Housing Fund, whose founder would be the Parliament of Montenegro.
Funds for the functioning of the fund would be provided by combining different sources: progressive taxation of excess apartments (apartments that are not objects of basic housing, unsold apartments intended for the market), special taxation of undeveloped construction land, from funds from the lease and sale of housing stock, issuance of bonds of the Fund, additional taxation of luxury, whereby the potential for private financing, planning and directing of social housing, as well as for the management and maintenance of the Fund through various forms of housing associations should be opened up;
state-supported housing must become available under equal conditions to everyone who needs this kind of support,
in order to achieve social balance and ensure the integration and cohesion of all social groups, especially the most vulnerable: the homeless, the long-term unemployed, pensioners with the lowest pensions, people with disabilities.
Priorities in such housing provision must be formed according to the extent of social, economic and other reasonable restrictions of households.
and without discrimination;
establishing a broad, accessible and sustainable system of social housing in public ownership - there is no alternative.
The announced legalization of informal buildings or the construction of several hundred apartments for certain social groups is not enough, nor are experimental or pilot projects such as "1000 plus apartments".
Mass construction of cheap housing units is necessary, regardless of whether the resulting fund will be used as social or public housing, rental or ownership.
Today, when modern materials and construction technologies ensure the production of apartments for around 200 euros per m2 - it is not a question of finances, but a question of the will of the political majority and responsible politicians.
SOCIAL POLICY, SOLIDARITY AND CARE OF THE ELDERLY
Our task:
Montenegro is a state of social justice, solidarity and social security.
Introduction:
Montenegro must become a state of social justice and a responsible social society,
because it is a condition of its social cohesion,
and thus its progress.
Democratic Montenegro attaches great importance to the achievement of this goal.
The solidarity of the entire society and the state with the vulnerable and the weak is the fundamental value of the social policy that Democratic Montenegro stands for.
The strength of society is recognized by how much it is willing to do for those who once did for them.
The people who built this country must not be allowed to live on the brink of misery today.
Social protection of persons who are unable to work and do not have the means to live, secure and dignified old age, must be the concern of the state.
The state cannot take upon itself the solution of all life issues and problems of citizens
- individuals cannot be released from responsibility for their existence and the existence of their family.
Description of the condition:
Montenegro is a country where the participation of the elderly in the total structure of the population is significantly represented.
We live in a time when the traditional family is losing its basic role of togetherness, which guaranteed family care for the elderly, especially for parents and other close relatives.
Today, the family increasingly loses its protective role and care for the elderly, because newly created work and other obligations require absence from the family.
Faced with material problems and their own difficulties, people express less and less solidarity with those who need it.
These changes in the family were not followed by the state's efforts to develop organized institutions that, in the area of ​​caring for the elderly, would partially or fully take over the role of the family.
A worryingly small number of old people's homes, day care homes for the elderly and other facilities that would ensure social solidarity and care for the elderly were built.
The transition process and the opening of bankruptcy proceedings had serious consequences for employees in Montenegro and their families.
Tens of thousands of workers, after the bankruptcy or liquidation of their companies, are referred to the Employment Office to survive with very low benefits on the basis of unemployment, without any prospect of new employment.
AGE MUST BE BEAUTIFUL
About 125,000 citizens exercise rights based on pension and disability insurance and other benefits at the PIO Fund of Montenegro, with a tendency to further increase the number of users of these rights.
Pensions in Montenegro have not been harmonized with the law since January 2012.
The average pension is now 273 euros.
The pensions of a large number of pensioners are not sufficient to meet their basic life needs.
This especially applies to over 32 thousand pensioners, whose incomes are below the absolute poverty line, of which about 6,500 pensioners receive the lowest pension in Montenegro of 100.40 euros.
Most of the beneficiaries of these pensions are existentially dependent on the help of others or live in extreme poverty.
Among these categories of the population, there are certainly elderly households, whose members have spent their entire working life in the countryside engaged in agriculture,
and apart from a very low amount of old-age allowance, they do not receive any other income.
The state pays benefits based on social and child protection for a significant number of beneficiaries of these rights.
Despite the regularity of the payment of these benefits, their amount does not provide even a minimum quality of life for: beneficiaries of material family security, beneficiaries of other people's care and assistance, personal disability benefits, allowances for children and other social benefits.
Despite all this, a large number of citizens of Montenegro are in the poverty zone.
And the biggest cause of poverty and social exclusion is unemployment.
Poverty is particularly pronounced in rural areas,
in marginalized groups,
among refugees and displaced persons, Roma,
but also among the unemployed, pensioners with low incomes, etc.
With this state of affairs in Montenegrin society, only the combined efforts of the state, wider social community and citizens can provide progress and conditions for the normal life of every citizen.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Through economic policy and reforms in all spheres of social life, we will provide conditions for a normal life for the most vulnerable sections of society, from children and persons with disabilities to pensioners;
we will lead an active policy of strengthening social protection,
but also to create conditions so that the citizens themselves could take greater responsibility for their social security and the security of their own families:
the changed traditional role of the family in care and solidarity towards the closest obliges us to create the conditions for family values ​​to be valued more
and that the attitude towards the elderly in the family has all the elements and moral values ​​that would make the family home the safest place for elderly people to live;
we will build an appropriate number of homes for the elderly and day care homes with all facilities for comfortable housing, medical care and decent living;
we will establish a just relationship between the state and those who need help,
and through the consistent application of the data of the established social record, enable social benefits to be given only to those who need them;
reduction of drastic social differences between citizens
and improving the social protection of persons who are unable to work and have no means of livelihood, the infirm, the elderly, persons with special needs, war veterans and other beneficiaries of rights from social and veterans' disability protection, will be our special concern;
we will establish a legal framework for the full and adequate participation of persons with disabilities in all areas of life on an equal basis, especially in the areas of employment, integration into the working and living environment, education, culture, housing;
we will also establish a legal framework, which will, among other things, provide financial support for families with children, the right to child allowance for each child, a special incentive to have children, as well as special support for financially disadvantaged families with children, children with developmental disabilities, and children without parental care;
we will eliminate all systemic deformations that affect the imbalance of funds in the pension fund,
and thus on its financial sustainability.
Payment of wages and payment of contributions must be made simultaneously without exception or delay;
we will support the development of voluntary pension and disability insurance as a form of personal savings and insurance for old age, disability or illness;
dynamic economic growth and development,
creation of new jobs,
application of active employment measures,
we will contribute to the work of voluntary and humanitarian organizations that work on developing solidary relations between people and providing assistance to the poor and infirm, because these are also the principles of the operation of Democratic Montenegro.
additional training, education and qualification of the unemployed, as the only way to get out of the vicious cycle of poverty in Montenegro, to which activities we will give the greatest importance;
EFFICIENT HEALTHCARE
Our task:
satisfied citizens, doctors and health workers - healthy Montenegro!
Introduction:
HEALTHY MONTENEGRO
The state's health system is a mirror of a society and an indicator of the state of affairs in the state.
as well as relations with citizens in those segments most sensitive to human development and survival.
The health system of Montenegro is organized as a unique health region and is predominantly based on the public sector.
Public health institutions are organized through a network of primary, secondary and tertiary care, which includes 18 health centers, seven general hospitals, three special hospitals, the Clinical Center of Montenegro, the Institute for Emergency Medical Assistance, the Institute for Blood Transfusion, the Institute for public health and the pharmacy institution "Montefarm", which includes 41 pharmacies throughout Montenegro.
Description of the condition:
The expenditures that Montenegro spends on healthcare as a percentage of GDP are the lowest compared to the countries of the region.
The number of doctors shows an average of 2.06 doctors per 1000 inhabitants, while the European average is 3.4.
When it comes to accommodation capacity, the data show that Montenegro has 3.92 beds per 1000 inhabitants, while the average in the European Union states is 5.29.
The party state also gave birth to the system of election of managers of health institutions, dominantly according to the party key and coalition agreements,
and not through public tenders, where all those who wish would be given the opportunity to offer a vision of development and management management based on professional principles.
Incompetent managerial staff in many institutions is one of the direct causes of the current state of healthcare,
as well as dissatisfaction among doctors and other health workers.
The reform of primary health care was done formally,
but its only partial application has led to a rather poor situation in this area.
It is unacceptable that the insured must make an appointment with his chosen doctor if he has an acute health problem that is not currently life-threatening.
Also, the level of health services provided by primary health care is unacceptably low or is so poorly organized that the time for which the insured can receive the appropriate service is absurdly long, very often and pointlessly,
without talking about the possible consequences due to such an approach that the citizens of Montenegro had the opportunity to feel or see.
The current system of financing health institutions is actually an indicator of the absence of a healthy system and clear rules of order, work and quality.
No matter how much the health care institution was able to make a profit, its budget was determined by outdated, self-management methods that should have been forgotten a long time ago.
The transition to a new model of financing and redistribution is a prerequisite for the development of the health system.
One of the most significant problems of the health system is the working conditions in which a significant number of health institutions or certain parts of them operate.
as well as the salaries of doctors and health workers.
They are at the lower limit of decency and are one of the causes of this state of health care.
Such a level of earnings led to the emergence of a system of optional forms of payment (criminal act).
working beyond capacity, which leads to chronic exhaustion and a significantly greater possibility of medical errors and fictitious sick days
and departures to other jobs that are better paid, as well as departures of personnel abroad
The basis of a good health system is an economically satisfied doctor and nurse/technician.
Without this kind of satisfaction, it is pointless to even talk about reforms in healthcare.
Unfortunately, the current payment system does not separate work from non-work and expertise from incompetence because there is no adequate and efficient system of punishment and reward.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Depoliticization of healthcare, as a prerequisite for the creation of professional and competent staff in the management of public institutions.
In this direction, the system of electing directors of JZU and KBC should be changed.
in such a way that they are selected through a public competition with the possibility of applying for all those who meet the competition requirements;
the rationalization of healthcare, which implies the reorganization of the current system of hospitals in order to create a more economically profitable and efficient system.
In this direction, it is necessary:
to merge Kotor Hospital and Risan Special Hospital because their existence in the current constellation has no economic justification.
A modern hospital needs to be built for the Budva-Tivat-Kotor part of the coast;
small emergency (trauma) centers should be established in the hospital in Bar, as in the Kotor hospital, which will raise the level of tourist health care;
the psychiatric hospital in Kotor should be relocated, bearing in mind that it is located in one of the most attractive tourist locations;
in the north, it is necessary to make the Beran hospital essentially regional,
and keep the hospitals in Pljevlja and Bijelo Polje for acute patients, i.e. emergency surgery and emergency internal medicine.
The Cetinje hospital should be more clearly profiled for certain areas of medicine because it is too close to Podgorica.
Narrowly specialize in ENT, MFH, department for hernia surgery, gynecology (in vitro fertilization) in order to relieve the Clinical Center and justify the permanence of the hospital in Cetinje;
in Podgorica, to build a modern Emergency Center with about 150 beds, which would not only solve the problem of space in the Clinical Center, but also eliminate numerous other problems in Montenegrin healthcare.
Departments could deal with elective patients, and waiting lists would be rapidly reduced.
the system of elected doctor must be implemented in the full sense of the word.
This implies that the necessary diagnostic capacities, which include X-rays, ultrasonography and laboratory diagnostics, are installed in institutions that work on the principle of a chosen doctor in all major health centers.
In this way, every insured person would have the necessary basic medical diagnostics in the palm of his hand, and at the same time, large systems such as general hospitals and KC would be relieved.
The best health systems in the world, which are based on a similar order as ours, show by example that this is not a dream.
This is more than possible and achievable in the kind of system we have and would be one of the keys to efficiency, optimization and savings in the health care system;
- the transition to the DRG system of financing health institutions, which provides payment according to the services provided, i.e. the system "how much you work, how much you will earn".
It allegedly ensures that the competent Fund pays the hospitals a clearly established price for each treated patient, and not a flat rate as before.
The aforementioned will enable the redistribution of budget funds, in such a way that finally work and quality in the provision of services come to the fore and be a measuring element;
drastically raising the level of investment in the education of doctors and health workers,
accompanied by the formation of a special body at the competent Ministry that would monitor and encourage this process;
to stimulate the private health sector, but in a financially sound way that will allow insured persons greater accessibility to certain health services,
bearing in mind that private healthcare institutions are one of the important levers of a quality healthcare system.
"Provoke" and encourage the owners of private health services to the private-public partnership system and stimulate projects of this type.
significantly improve the position of doctors and health workers;
capital investments in improving working conditions
and equipment of health institutions will be a priority of our policy.
MEDIA FREEDOMS
Our task:
Montenegro to be the personification of independent, objective, protected and free media,
and not a symbol for attacks on journalists, media property and unexplained murders of public speakers.
Introduction:
OPEN MONTENEGRO
The media is the civic consciousness of society,
and free journalism is one of the basic postulates of modern democracies.
Theory and practice clearly show that there is no democracy without a free press
because media freedoms are the basis for the realization of all other rights and freedoms.
Thomas Jefferson, an American statesman and one of the founders of the USA, said "if I had to choose whether we should have a Government without a press or a press without a Government, I would not hesitate to choose the latter".
The right to freedom of expression through speech, written word, image or other means is defined by Article 47 of the Constitution of Montenegro.
Every country that aspires to become a member of the EU must respect the standards on media freedom that are clearly defined by Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, as well as the Copenhagen criteria for EU membership.
Independent and professional media that promote democracy, human rights and freedoms are of inestimable importance for supporting integration processes.
Description of the condition:
When we talk about the identification of the situation in Montenegro, we can start from the analyzes that European officials have on the issue of freedom of expression in Montenegro.
The latest Report on the progress of Montenegro, as well as the resolutions of the European Parliament show great concern about the worsening situation in the field of media freedom, weak professional and ethical standards among media employees,
as well as the increase in the number of incidents whose victims are journalists and media assets.
Our European partners clearly emphasize that violence against journalists remains a serious cause for concern
because attacks on journalists are a direct attack on democracy
and European integration.
Montenegro bears a heavy burden of unsolved murders,
as well as numerous brutal attacks on journalists and media property.
Facts that show that there are no concrete results in the investigations of numerous attacks and crimes against freedom of speech in Montenegro.
it obviously only encourages their inspirers and principals by creating an atmosphere of fear, mistrust, inequality and anti-democracy.
The drastic growth of the number of media, especially those that operate in various forms via the Internet, has caused that, as a product of strong market competition, we often have sensationalism at the expense of quality news and information.
Reportage and investigative reporting projects are often avoided due to financial deficiencies or increased dependence.
In the general race for exclusivity, it is not uncommon to publish unverified information with a sea of ​​debatable parameters from the point of view of ethics.
It is a special question how individual media, hiding behind media freedoms, have inherited classic media rot and impurity, attacking public morality, reputation, honor and dignity, that is, those values ​​we pride ourselves on as a society.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Urgent undertaking of decisive measures to first of all shed light on murders and attacks on media workers and their property, from the perpetrators to the ultimate principals
because it is a guarantee and basic assumption of ensuring the realization of freedom of expression as a constitutional category
and safety of all citizens,
and especially representatives of the media;
we will insist that journalists be granted the status of official persons in order to increase the level of their security, especially in the light of frequent attacks on public speech,
as well as to introduce new criminal offenses in the Criminal Code in order to prevent attacks on journalists;
we will encourage the media and journalists themselves to contribute to the achievement of media freedom by raising professional standards, respecting ethical codes, the right to reply and verified information, investing in investigative journalism, etc.
we will enable citizens' public services to truly perform the function for which they were established
and in the interest of those who pay them in a way that will strengthen the independence of the RTCG Council,
as well as the editorial policy itself;
we will ensure compliance with the prohibition of discrimination,
as well as the protection of the right to honor, reputation, human dignity in media activity,
but also to create conditions for the work of journalists to be free from unprincipled pressures from editors and political influences;
we will encourage the media to pay attention to concrete topics and discussions concerning our European integrations to a much greater extent than the current one through work and action;
transparency and publicity of socio-political activities and media freedom will be at the epicenter of our activities.
It is clear that in addition to the legislative, executive and judicial authorities, today the media is considered the fourth pillar of democracy.
That is why the role of the media is particularly important in young democracies like ours, where there are no established and independent institutions of the system,
so investigative journalism often plays a crucial role due to the weak work of judicial and other authorities.
CULTURE
A modern state serving cultural creators
Our task:
freedom and the development of cultural and artistic creativity and the preservation of cultural heritage must be the basis for the stability and construction of a democratic society!
PROUD MONTENEGRO
Introduction:
The state must lead an active cultural policy
because culture is the basis of a democratic society
and a temple of spirituality, thus representing a permanent value and measure for the quality of life of all citizens of Montenegro.
Culture is a spiritual need of society
and that is why all cultural values ​​must be nurtured, especially the rich cultural heritage and cultural identity of Montenegro.
Investing in culture and creating cultural infrastructure is an investment in the future.
The modern state must be a service to cultural creators, not a tutor,
and the creators are the ones who have to create the culture development policy.
Culture as a set of values ​​and social activity can affirm our country in the international framework
. We see culture as a factor in the spiritual identity and recognizability of the people,
but also as a bridge to other cultures.
Culture is not only a product of the past but also determines the direction of institutional changes
and affects the original development path of a country and people.
Freedom of artistic creativity is a guarantee of a rich and layered social structure.
Intellectual property protection is an important factor in sustainable economic growth.
Description of the condition:
Lack of cultural infrastructure, primarily theaters, cinemas, museums, opera halls
it also means a lack of cultural education, which leads to the degradation of spiritual values.
Without specific investments in culture, Montenegro remains at the bottom of the European scale.
Considering that culture means freedom
opinions, culture of behavior, moral and spiritual balance requires strong financial support from the state.
We are witnessing the devastation of cultural heritage, insufficient care for cultural and historical monuments, inappropriate treatment of them and ineffective protection of intellectual property.
The disappearance of the middle class in the past period significantly reduced the impulse for cultural manifestations.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Connecting cultural institutions with certain social activities and institutions in tourism;
adoption of the Strategy on Affirmation of Philanthropy, Donation and Patronage;
development and freedom of cultural and artistic creativity,
especially support to all amateur cultural societies that gather and nurture the talent of young people and
preserve the cultural heritage of all citizens of Montenegro;
the creation of effective assumptions for the development of the culture of ethnic communities that would preserve their uniqueness and contribute to a more harmonious relationship in society;
effective protection of intellectual property and an effective sanctioning policy in this area;
depoliticization in cultural institutions;
raising the level of all forms of culture: from the culture of housing, behavior, communication to the creation of infrastructural and financial conditions,
that culture would be a significant development opportunity for Montenegro;
strong support for filmmakers;
the basic criterion in culture should be exclusively the quality of cultural workers and program content;
improvement of the material and social position of cultural creators and all employees in cultural activities so that they can live from their work;
provision of stable sources of funding for cultural programs;
enable cultural contents to be available to all citizens of Montenegro, regardless of their financial status, because culture must not be left to commercialization;
nurturing all cultural values, especially the rich cultural heritage of Montenegro.
RELIGION
Our task:
The state and religious communities will cooperate with each other, bearing in mind that there is a common interest of religious communities and the state.
Introduction:
WE RESPECT THE DIVERSITIES WE HAVE
In accordance with Article 14 of the Constitution of Montenegro, religious communities are separate from the state, equal and free in performing religious ceremonies and religious affairs.
Freedom of religion is an intimate right of every individual in all democratic societies and
represents the basic prerequisite for the existence and improvement of basic democratic principles and postulates.
In other words, freedom of religion and respect for other faiths must be encouraged and promoted, not neglected and discouraged.
Man was and remains a social and religious being, and freedom of belief is derived from the basic human right, freedom of conscience,
which means that we all have the absolute right to change our own view of the world,
and the state has an obligation to remain neutral in that part, to guarantee that right and to enable us to enjoy that right unhindered.
Human rights belong to those categories of rights that everyone has, just by being a human being.
Description of the condition:
According to the population census, which was carried out in Montenegro in 2011, 72% of the population declared themselves as Orthodox, 16% as members of the Islamic religion, 3% as Muslims and 3.4% as Roman Catholics, while 5.4% are members of other groups such as which are Seventh Day Adventists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Jews, Protestants, Buddhists and those subjects who have not declared themselves religious.
Therefore, Montenegro is undoubtedly a multi-religious country and we are proud to point that out.
This is precisely what imposes on us the need and obligation to preserve and nurture such multi-religiousness in the interest of Montenegro and all its citizens.
because it is obvious that the majority of citizens of our country are also members of some religious community.
Montenegro is still a deeply divided society in terms of freedom of religion.
A certain number of attacks on religious buildings and church dignitaries were registered.
Such a situation and such behavior must not be tolerated, but in accordance with the law, effective action and timely measures against such behavior must be taken.
What does Democratic Montenegro offer?
Everyone has the right to be a believer, an atheist or an agnostic, because it is a basic human right and the spiritual commitment of a person and a citizen.
Democratic Montenegro will show special respect and appreciation for all canonically recognized churches and religious communities.
We will advocate for the absolute implementation of the constitutional principle of separation of church and state.
Religious communities will, in accordance with their internal organization, perform tasks within their jurisdiction, and the state will not interfere in church relations, because the tasks of the state and religious communities are clearly separated and differentiated.
We will work with all our might to make freedom of religion a natural right of every individual.
We will help all canonical churches and religious communities to build and restore their facilities, we will protect existing ones, we will respect and protect religious dignitaries and believers,
because by doing so, we are protecting the centuries-old history and tradition of Montenegro, which we are proud of.
The relationship of the state towards all canonical churches and religious communities will be equal, so that none will have a privileged position in relation to another.
How churches and religious communities distinguish believers according to political affiliation,
so even the state cannot distinguish between citizens based on their religious affiliation.
We will never again be held hostage to the political ambitions of individuals and political subjects who have maintained power or tried to win power by the popular "divide and rule", while the economic interests and living standards of citizens are left aside.
The agreement is the backbone of our political activity, regardless of the differences that exist.
The differences will be in the function of creating a modern state, not in the function of realizing personal and party interests.
No less important, taking into account the integrative processes of Montenegro, it is necessary to have active cooperation with international organizations and other entities in the international community.
POLICY OF PEACE AND COOPERATION
KEEP YOUR HOUSE, RESPECT YOUR NEIGHBORS
Since the dawn of time, people have focused on each other in overcoming problems and improving living conditions.
This did not change even when administrative borders were introduced between them.
On the contrary. Only cooperation was raised to the level of those who represented them.
That's why, even with the establishment of the first states, their representatives - forerunners in diplomacy, it became clear that without their openness to both their neighbors and the rest of the world, it is not possible to achieve even the basic interests of their states and peoples.
What can we say about the world we live in - a world where information is transmitted in a fraction of a second?
Therefore, in today's age of globalization, joint action is more necessary than ever in order to achieve success.
It is difficult to enumerate all the fields in which good interstate relations and recognition in the international community have a positive impact on concrete benefits for citizens.
- benefit for the economy: import, export, tourism; trade: exchange of goods, money, services;
youth education - student exchange;
security - elimination of threats of terrorism;
cooperation in the field of culture and sports.
In the era we live in, is it possible to imagine achieving sustainable development in any country,
as the development of society that satisfies human needs with available resources,
without endangering natural systems and the environment,
and that such development is not largely conditioned by multi-layered international cooperation?
We in Democratic Montenegro do not have a dilemma, but a clear answer - NO!
In a policy of openness towards new ideas, capital, cultures coming from all over the world,
but also in offering our products and presenting our tradition, customs, culture to others, more than in any other, the people who implement it are very important.
Bearing this in mind, it is not surprising that the pale and idealess picture of our foreign policy, which is the result of decades of practice of appointing people suitable for the party to key positions,
thus depriving the state and citizens of immediate benefits from its best personnel.
Bearing in mind all of the above, the people gathered in Democratic Montenegro will never allow themselves to make mistakes in the conduct of foreign policy, of which there have been plenty in the past quarter of a century.
This is because foreign policy is not an exception in the overall policy of the current government, which has proven disastrous for the vast majority of citizens.
In foreign policy, Democratic Montenegro advocates continued integration into the EU, as its priority direction
which simultaneously leads to the necessary democratization of society,
and thus to the general betterment,
but also for proactive cooperation with the United States of America, Russia, China and other BRICS members, the countries of Latin America and the Arab world, as well as with all other countries, nations and international organizations in the world,
which cooperation would be in the interest of our citizens, and would be based on the principles of the UN Charter and other confirmed international conventions.
We in Democratic Montenegro place special emphasis on the necessity of an even more active and connecting policy of good neighborly relations, which would especially with Serbia, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Srpska, the Republic of Macedonia,
but also to our bordering countries - Albania and Italy, was fruitful for all those who tied their fate to the region in which we are located.
In addition, it is necessary to maintain closer bilateral cooperation and friendly relations with all countries of the Balkans and the region of South-Eastern Europe,
but also to continue participating in regional projects of multilateral cooperation.
Through the determination to continue and strengthen friendly relations with those to whom we are geographically directed,
we undoubtedly show commitment to overall development
and raising our standards in a wide range of areas - from trade, tourism and energy to education, science, culture and sports.
Lastly, but not least, Democratic Montenegro is determined to resolve all existing or new open issues with its neighbors or other countries in the world in a peaceful manner, using legal and diplomatic means.
LET IT BE YOURS!
Our rise above divisions does not reduce anyone's right to have an individual attitude towards issues that are not specifically treated by the Program of Democratic Montenegro.
because equality is the need of Montenegro,
and diversity is our wealth,
because of which we joined together on healthy, clear, honest, dignified and pure principles.
We must never again allow ourselves to be discriminated against and separated just because we have exercised our natural right to feel as we wish,
to say what we think and to have a view of the world the way we think is right.
equal,
contemporary,
prosperous,
democratic and
rich Montenegro is our common goal and dream that we will achieve,
because it is our obligation to all generations, and especially to those who will succeed us.
