The state is efficient,
friendly,
egalitarian and open is the dream of Polish women and men.
To implement them, it is enough to follow the mechanisms and values ​​set out in the constitution
They are equality,
social market economy,
solidarism,
separation of church and state
Today, citizens' participation in state management is limited to elections.
Civil democracy and participation do not exist in practice
Gigantic income inequalities destroy society and attack the basic sense of justice
There remains a huge scale of unemployment, poverty and social exclusion
Poorly functioning or unenforced laws cause disappointment and frustration among citizens
We joined our forces to restore the state to its citizens.
The electoral program of the United Left contains a set of ideas for repairing our country
We know how to make our country better
Together we will restore Poles' dignity and the feeling that the state is on their side!
WORK
Low wages have become one of the barriers to Poland's development.
They limit internal demand and strangle the innovation of the Polish economy.
Yet Poland's development will be determined by two factors: internal demand
and innovations.
Another challenge Poland faces is improving the quality of jobs.
Junk contracts should be consigned to the dustbin of history.
The state's promotion of junk forms of employment must be put to an end.
Minimum wage PLN 2,500 per month.
Raising the minimum wage will increase consumption and will be an incentive to raise other wages in the labor market.
The minimum hourly wage is PLN 15, including for persons employed under civil law contracts.
The provisions guaranteeing a fair minimum wage should also benefit unemployed people.
Ban on unpaid internships.
Every job deserves remuneration.
Today, interns in many companies have become free labor.
This prohibition should not apply to internships carried out as part of vocational education.
Zero ZUS for 18 months for companies employing the first and second employee.
We guarantee the creation of 150,000 new jobs thanks to the "Zero zloty ZUS for 18 months" program.
The program is aimed at companies employing their first or second employee.
We also propose paying ZUS contributions by the state in the case of employment of young people and the permanently unemployed.
Fighting against junk contracts.
All forms of employment should be subject to the same taxes and contributions, which will reduce the attractiveness of junk contracts.
Today, as many as 1.6 million people work under civil law contracts.
This number may be significantly reduced thanks to active state policy.
The right to leave and sick leave for people employed under civil law contracts.
Persons employed under civil law contracts should have the same social rights as persons employed full-time.
Obligation to use social clauses in public procurement. One of the forms of fighting
with junk contracts, preference should be given to companies employing employees under employment contracts in tenders organized by public institutions.
Unfreezing the wages of public sector employees.
Donald Tusk's government froze the wages of public sector employees under the pretext of the economic crisis.
It was an attempt to shift the costs of overcoming the crisis onto the middle class and the poorest.
We reject this policy.
A wage increase in the public sector will increase consumption
and will increase economic growth.
Increasing the amount of annual leave for employees.
In the case of 8 years of work experience, up to 24 days, and in the case of 10 years of work experience, up to 30 days.
According to data from international organizations, Poles are one of the hardest-working societies in Europe.
Equal pay for equal work.
Active state policy to eliminate the differences in earnings between women and men performing the same work.
We advocate supporting the employment of single women raising children.
PENSIONS
Increasing the retirement age is an example of a change introduced against the public and against the election announcements of the ruling party.
This reform must be repaired in a way acceptable to Poles.
Employees should have the right to decide - after achieving appropriate length of service - when they will retire.
Lowering the retirement age.
Employees should have the right to retire after 40 years of work - for men, and for women - after 35 years of work.
Recognizing the period of employment under civil law contracts as seniority.
In the current situation on the labor market, this is a necessity.
Otherwise, the entire generation employed under junk contracts will not have the right to a pension.
Higher pensions for widows and widowers.
Currently, after the death of a husband or wife, the other spouse receives 85% of his pension.
However, he must then waive his benefit.
We want widows and widowers to be able to receive their pension and part of the benefit (25%) after their deceased spouse
or survivor's pension after the deceased spouse and in this case 25% of your own pension.
Raising the lowest pensions by PLN 200.
Percentage indexation of other pensions.
Pensioners should participate in sharing the fruits of economic growth.
Protecting the pension system by increasing the number of Poles employed under an employment contract and paying pension contributions.
The stability of the pension system depends on the number of employees making contributions.
Therefore, instead of raising the retirement age, employment under an employment contract should be promoted.
ECONOMIC POLICY
Economic policy should implement four priorities: dynamic economic growth,
full employment as possible,
active role of the state,
knowledge-based economy.
These priorities should be implemented by: Adopting clear, strategic economic policy priorities in a 10-year perspective.
Subordination of budgetary and EU support policies to these priorities
(energy industry - with priority for renewable energy sources, IT, biotechnology, machinery and electromechanical industry).
Introduction of the principle of basic coherence of the state's economic, fiscal, scientific, foreign and educational policies.
Reform of the economic management center.
Changing the role of the Minister of Economy,
creation of the ministry of energy,
creation of one agency responsible for investment promotion,
industrial development
and economic promotion abroad.
Reindustrialization carried out thanks to the creation of three industrial districts.
Development of districts based on investment reliefs,
funds from the European Union,
active role of the state in building infrastructure.
Construction of road, railway and telecommunications infrastructure
as a form of state support for regional economic development.
Shifting the burden of control from small and medium-sized enterprises to corporations evading taxes in Poland.
Poland's introduction to the top ten of the World Bank's "Doing Business" ranking thanks to the following changes:
shortening the list of activities when establishing a company to one;
all administrative and reporting activities of the company are fully automated and available via the Internet;
for micro-entrepreneurs (up to the turnover level of PLN 100,000 per year) limiting the company's reporting to a one-page statement;
creation of the "family company" category, simplifying the rules of employment and settlements in companies established by families;
simplification of investment processes, standardization of requirements, simplification of patent procedures.
Building professional support for exports and economic expansion:
building an institution for financing and insuring international trade (following the example of the German company Hermes);
establishing branches of Bank Gospodarstwa Krajowego in countries that are key to economic development;
building a professional economic diplomacy service;
subordinating export support to economic development priorities.
Increasing citizens' income through the citizen bonus mechanism.
Each citizen should receive a part of the GDP growth generated in a given year.
In 2014 it would be PLN 500 per person.
DATA
The tax system should serve to equalize the standard of living of citizens.
Taxes should be fair, i.e. progressive.
We want the rich to pay higher taxes and the poor to pay lower taxes.
or were completely exempt from paying income tax.
We will also tax financial institutions that speculate on financial markets and threaten the stability of the entire economy.
PIT tax exemption for income up to PLN 21,000. PLN per year.
Income up to the minimum wage should be exempt from tax.
In the case of the current level of the minimum wage, people with income up to PLN 21,000 would not pay income tax. PLN per year.
If it were raised to the level we propose, people with incomes up to PLN 30,000 would not pay income tax. PLN per year.
Restoration of the 40% PIT rate for people with the highest incomes.
Wealthy people should pay higher taxes.
We will reverse the tax reform of the PiS government, which is contrary to the ideas of Poland of solidarity.
Creation of a new, simpler and more coherent VAT Act that will eliminate loopholes that allow fraud.
Tax law should be interpreted in the same way throughout the country.
VAT reduction up to 21%.
The VAT cut will increase domestic consumption.
VAT is a de facto regressive tax, so families with the lowest incomes will benefit most from this change.
Tightening the tax system.
Compensatory taxation of companies located in tax havens.
Introduction of a general anti-tax avoidance clause.
Tax on speculative financial transactions.
The tax on speculative financial transactions (FTT) could bring up to PLN 40 billion annually to the Polish budget.
Eleven European Union member states have already decided to introduce FTT: Germany, France, Belgium, Austria, Slovenia, Portugal, Greece, Slovakia, Italy, Spain and Estonia.
Tax on bank assets in the amount of 0.5%.
Banks make huge profits in Poland.
In 2014, it was over PLN 16 billion.
Banks should share these profits with society.
Bank tax is already in force in 13 European Union countries, including Great Britain, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, Austria and Slovakia.
HEALTH
The government imposed such conditions on the functioning of the system that its purpose became the provision of benefits, settlement of points and... earning money, and not working to improve the health of Polish women and men.
We reject such a system.
We support a public health service that cannot be profit-oriented.
The purpose of healthcare is to treat patients and keep them healthy, not to make a profit.
Increase in public spending on health to 7% of GDP - the average level in the EU.
Additional money will be brought to the system by, among other things, contributions to all income from work, including civil law (waste) contracts.
This will significantly shorten annoying queues.
Abolition of limits in health care.
We demand the abolition of limits on health services financed by the National Health Fund.
Poland is the only European Union country where the possibility of obtaining medical assistance depends on the limit set by the public payer.
Only medical indications and the best medical knowledge should be the criteria for providing health services.
No one can leave the window in a hospital or clinic just because the National Health Fund has arbitrarily set a limit on health services.
The right to health care due to citizenship.
We want to eliminate the expensive system that verifies whether a given patient is insured.
Everyone should be entitled to health insurance by virtue of their citizenship.
Opposition to co-payments for treatment.
We guard the Constitution, Art. 68 guarantees all citizens - regardless of wealth - the right to health care.
Introducing fees for access to a doctor would violate this provision.
Opposition to transforming hospitals into companies.
We oppose the commercialization and privatization of hospitals.
Healthcare entities financed from public funds should not operate to make a profit.
We demand that it be possible to create new public hospitals and clinics in the form of SPZOZ.
The state will guard the secular nature of health care.
Doctors should treat in accordance with the state of medical knowledge, and not guided by their own religious worldview.
Taking consequences against doctors who abuse the conscience clause.
Opposition to the conscience clause for pharmacists.
Free medicines for the poorest seniors.
Funds for drug reimbursement should be increased.
The poorest seniors should receive medicines for free.
Reimbursement of in vitro infertility treatment.
The right to have children belongs to all people, regardless of their level of wealth.
Legalization of medical marijuana and hemp oil.
Consent to scientific research on their use.
The treatment of patients should be guided by the latest medical knowledge, not prejudices.
Free access to remote care for the elderly.
The life button allows you to immediately call for help in a life- or health-threatening situation.
Increasing the number of places in medical studies by 50%.
The Polish health service suffers from a shortage of doctors.
For example, there are 334 geriatricians in Poland.
There are 314 counties in Poland.
Theoretically, there is one geriatrician per district.
In fact, in many counties there is not a single geriatrician.
Therefore, admission limits for medical specializations should also be increased.
EDUCATION
Education is the best investment.
We want it to be free and available from preschool.
A good school is a modern, friendly school, free from religious indoctrination.
The state should protect such a school.
Increasing spending on education.
Poland, with spending on education amounting to 4.94% of GDP, ranks 9th from the bottom in the EU ranking.
For comparison, in 2005 Poland spent 5.47% of its GDP on education.
Liquidation of junior high schools.
Back to eight-grade primary school.
Junior high schools are a failed educational experiment.
The same educational goals could be achieved by reforming the core curriculum, without changing the organizational structure of Polish education.
We emphasize that junior high schools contribute to the accumulation of educational problems.
At the same time, we support maintaining the 12-year period of school education, which is a guarantee of maintaining teachers' jobs.
Changing the education system should take place in consultation with local government officials.
Public local government nurseries and kindergartens free of charge for at least eight hours a day.
Pre-school education should be as accessible and free as education in primary school, junior high school or post-secondary school.
Pre-school education should be financed by the state budget as part of the educational subsidy.
Nursery care should also be available and free for all children.
That is why we demand the introduction of a nursery subsidy for municipalities, similar to the educational subsidy.
The state budget must help local governments not only in building new nurseries, but above all in maintaining places for the youngest children.
Taking religion lessons out of schools.
Abolition of catechesis by the state.
This will save over PLN 1.2 billion annually.
We propose that this money be used for other educational purposes, e.g. building new nurseries or increasing the number of language lessons in schools.
Separation of school and religion.
Secular nature of teaching and upbringing in schools and kindergartens.
The school should provide knowledge based on the latest scientific findings.
The school year cannot begin with compulsory mass.
Religion grade should be removed from school report cards.
The Teacher's Card is a guarantee of ensuring free education of appropriate quality and at the highest possible level.
We support maintaining the Teacher's Charter as a specific collective labor agreement.
Without the Teacher's Card, the educational success of Polish students in recent years would be impossible.
Protecting schools against privatization and commercialization.
Transforming small schools into local government education and cultural centers, open to the needs of the local community.
Strengthening the links between vocational schools and workplaces, taking into account the needs of the labor market.
Vocational education should develop in close cooperation with workplaces.
A dual model should be developed, in which education takes place both at school and at work.
Students are paid and have good employment prospects.
The system of continuing education should be developed.
Providing six-year-olds with optimal education and care conditions.
The decision to send a child to school should be based on optional psychological consultations.
Schools and the curriculum should be adapted to the needs of six-year-olds.
Medical and dental care in schools and kindergartens.
In today's Poland, dental care has become almost completely marketized.
That's why we support the restoration of dental care in schools.
Children's health protection, including dental care, is an essential attribute of a modern country.
Dental preventive care in schools is not an expense, but an investment in a healthy society.
Doctors' positions in schools may be financed under the residency system.
Another solution is mobile dental offices.
Strengthening the role of school libraries and defining their activities for local communities.
We oppose plans to transform school libraries.
Instead of saving on libraries, the Ministry of National Education should create a special fund for the purchase of new book collections.
In communes where there are no municipal public libraries, school libraries should be open to the public.
Reducing the number of students in classes.
The demographic decline should not be an opportunity to close schools, but an opportunity to limit the number of students in classes.
Multiple shifts should be abolished in Polish schools.
Reliable sexual education.
It should be carried out by teachers with specialist education, not by catechists.
The knowledge provided during lessons should reflect the state of scientific knowledge, not religious superstitions.
Free breakfast and lunch for every child at school and kindergarten.
Children cannot leave school or kindergarten hungry.
Full-day care for students at schools in school clubs.
A full-fledged school is one that provides children with care during parents' working hours.
Restoring the appropriate rank of probation officers' pedagogical supervision.
School boards should once again become an institution that cares about the quality of teaching in schools, regardless of the status of their governing body
SCIENCE
Poland is threatened with a development drift trap.
We can only avoid it if we invest in scientific research that will increase the innovativeness of our economy.
When Poland becomes a country of innovative industry, the earnings of employees throughout the economy will increase.
Allocating 60% of GDP growth per year to research, development and investments in science.
Possibility to donate one percent of CIT to a selected scientific institution.
This will encourage companies to invest in science.
Permanent, stable high financing of science from the state budget.
High statutory subsidies as the basis for financing the salaries of employees, as well as other educational expenses (research trips, conference trips, etc.).
Scientific and research grants should only be an additional source of income, and not the main one as currently.
Preventing wasteful employment of research workers.
Contributing to making science funnier are, among others: grants as the basis for contracts for specific work, mandate contracts and fixed-term contracts.
Junk contracts in the science sector mean not only job instability, but also a deterioration in the quality of scientific research.
Permanent employment is the basis for high quality and continuity of scientific research.
Liquidation of habilitation.
Lifting the barrier blocking the careers of young scientists.
Stopping the exploitation of doctoral students and junior researchers.
Such exploitation is facilitated by the points and grant system: young researchers work for points and under grants supervised by senior scientists.
Financial exploitation is accompanied by unequal access to benefits related to managing grants.
Support for cooperation between industry and science.
Creation of an institution financing science, taking into account the needs of industry and investment financing from the European Union.
Sustainable development of the world of science.
Supporting smaller research centers as an investment in the labor market and development of a given region.
Increasing funding for the humanities.
Changing the system of financing the humanities: awards instead of grants.
The humanities cannot be treated as a second-class science.
FLATS
The state should pursue an active housing policy.
It is the best flywheel of the entire economy.
We know how to provide poor Poles with access to housing, while stimulating economic development.
National housing construction program.
We propose a national housing construction program financed through the National Economy Bank thanks to the so-called mechanism. quantitative easing of the National Bank of Poland.
The central bank would lend commercial banks (taking advantage of its privileged position) funds dedicated to housing construction.
These funds could be borrowed by local governments to build apartments for rent.
Increasing the number of apartments for rent.
Introduction of a tax relief related to apartment rental for owners who decide to rent their apartments on the market and developers who will build apartments for this purpose.
Development of occasional rentals.
It will result in the return of at least 10% of over 400,000 uninhabited year-round apartments to the market.
It is necessary to guarantee the security of the lease not only for owners, but also for tenants, among others: by introducing mechanisms that guarantee stability in paying apartment fees.
Help for "franc borrowers" by invalidating prohibited clauses in loan agreements.
Banks should also - under the Act - create a fund to help repay mortgage loans to people who find themselves in a difficult financial situation, regardless of whether the loan was taken out in Swiss francs or Polish zloty.
Ban on street evictions.
Each eviction should be accompanied by the provision of alternative accommodation.
Poland should ratify the Revised European Social Charter, together with Article 31 guaranteeing the right to housing and the complaints protocols.
Differentiation of rents in municipal apartments.
Introducing a differentiation in the amount of rent in municipal apartments, depending on the income situation of the tenants' households.
Public housing assistance in the form of low rents should be addressed to those most in need.
At the same time, in order to maintain social diversity, lease agreements with tenants of municipal apartments whose income situation is improving should not be terminated.
However, they should pay higher rent than people with lower incomes,
and the increased revenues to local government budgets should support the development of municipal construction.
Restoration of large construction tax relief.
It will hit the gray zone and lead to the development of the largest economic sector - housing.
INFRASTRUCTURE
We support sustainable development.
One of the tools for its creation is the construction of infrastructure that connects not only the largest metropolises, but also medium-sized cities.
Modern railways, roads and a network of post offices are intended to help overcome the division into Poland A and Poland B.
Development of the railway connection network, also covering district cities.
Railways are primarily local and regional connections enabling commuting to work.
Therefore, we will strive to increase financial expenditure on the modernization of existing railway lines and the construction of new ones and the reconstruction of closed railway lines in Poland,
and support the creation of intermodal transport infrastructure.
We also intend to support the creation of urban and regional railway systems in Poland's largest cities and agglomerations.
Opposition to the privatization of strategic PKP companies - PKP Energetyka, Intercity.
A particular scandal is the attempt to sell the company PKP Energetyka, which is strategic from the point of view of state security, to a speculative fund.
Transfer of ownership of railway infrastructure components from railway companies to direct ownership of the State Treasury
and local government units.
This will ensure better use of railway infrastructure.
Development of bicycle transport.
One thing that can help solve the problem of traffic jams, reduce individual transport costs, and at the same time improve the health of Polish women is the development of bicycle transport.
In cities, bicycles and public transport must be clearly favored over cars.
Outside cities, Polish sections of the trans-European EuroVelo bicycle routes should be urgently completed (separating them from car traffic, if possible).
Elimination of toll gates on highways, introduction of an electronic toll collection system.
This system will eliminate traffic jams at highway toll gates.
Continuation of the national road and highway construction program.
Support for the renovation of local roads.
When building and renovating roads, it is also necessary to create infrastructure in the form of bicycle and pedestrian routes,
also between towns - this will increase the possibilities of moving people and their safety.
Maintaining the public character of the Polish Post.
Fighting unfair competition in the postal services market using social clauses in public institutions' tenders for postal services.
Full implementation of the "Internet in every home" program.
Using European funds to build internet infrastructure, especially in rural areas.
POWER ENGINEERING
The Polish energy sector should be based on two pillars: renewable energy sources.
and coal energy
Renewable energy is an opportunity for millions of households to produce energy for their own needs, as well as a way to improve the country's energy security and the state of the natural environment.
Coal is a guarantee of energy security.
Coal energy must be modernized,
to become more environmentally friendly.
Support for climate policy,
while renegotiating it towards the protection of coal-based energy.
We support a climate policy that will enable the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions
while protecting the competitiveness of the Polish economy.
The state and the European Union should provide greater support for the implementation of energy-saving technologies.
We should strive for more environmentally friendly coal-fired energy.
Protection of mining jobs and miners' pensions.
The goal of state policy towards mining should be to ensure Poland's energy security,
and jobs for miners and employees of mining-related industries.
There should be integration of the mining industry with the energy industry in the form of energy companies combining the extraction of raw materials with energy production.
This will help maintain employment in mining,
and at the same time it will increase the efficiency and rationality of resource management.
At the same time, emphasis should be placed on the development of green jobs in regions economically dependent on mining,
so that the gradual phase-out of coal does not cause social crises or an increase in unemployment.
Abandoning the intention to build a nuclear power plant in Poland.
In the current situation, building a nuclear power plant would mean the need to purchase technology and would increase Poland's energy dependence by having to purchase nuclear fuel abroad.
The Polish energy mix should be based on renewable energy
and coal energy.
Support for prosumer energy.
Prosumer energy is a chance for hundreds of thousands of Polish families to achieve energy independence.
Its development requires the creation of a stable and favorable legal framework for prosumers and support for the competitiveness of the energy produced in this way.
An additional benefit will be the improvement of the quality of the environment, in particular the reduction of air pollution levels, and, consequently, the improvement of the health of Polish women and men.
Regulation of the rules for creating wind farms within the framework of spatial order.
Support for the development of renewable energy in rural areas, including support for photovoltaic power plants and biogas plants.
Cessation of support for co-combustion of biomass with coal as a renewable energy source.
Co-combustion, which often involves burning wood and coal, is a denial of the idea of ​​ecological energy production and should not be subsidized or legally supported.
Creation of a comprehensive plan for the modernization of transmission networks in Poland in order to guarantee security of energy supplies and adapt the network to changes related to the development of renewable energy.
Establishing binding and ambitious goals for the share of renewable energy in the energy mix, so that green business has predictable operating conditions.
Creation of a ministry of energy.
The ministry should perform strategic and ownership functions.
Such a ministry will take care of Poland's energy security and the mutual coherence of energy contracts as well as the pro-ecological transformation of the energy sector.
The ministry will also promote renewable energy sources,
rationalization of energy use in the country,
development of modern technologies, energy storage, smart grids, etc
It is to exercise ownership supervision over all energy companies with State Treasury participation.
AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Membership in the European Union has opened up unprecedented opportunities for Polish agriculture.
Unfortunately, they are not fully used.
At the same time, the Russian embargo has clipped the wings of many domestic producers.
The state must pursue a wise policy that will allow it to fully exploit the opportunities associated with EU membership.
On the other hand, in its eastern policy, the state must take into account the interests of Polish agricultural producers.
Allocation of the budget reserve for compensation to farmers and fruit growers affected by the embargo of the Russian Federation.
EU compensation covered a negligible part of the losses suffered by Polish farmers as a result of the Russian embargo.
In this situation, farmers should receive compensation from the state budget.
The state should also launch a new tranche of preferential loans for farmers and fruit growers.
Support for the development of organic farms.
In Poland, there are relatively many small, several-hectare family farms for which organic farming could become a chance for survival and development.
Regulations should be created to support the operation of such farms and strengthen their position on the market.
Development of community-supported agriculture, i.e. an alternative food distribution system in which consumers purchase agricultural products directly from farmers.
Community supported agriculture enables the production of good quality food for the needs of the local community and involves close cooperation between farmers and buyers.
In this way, it strengthens local social bonds and, by shortening the food distribution chain, allows for better protection of the natural environment,
improves the profitability of agricultural production on small farms,
and enables consumers to purchase high-quality products at affordable prices.
Incentives for commercial farmers to move to the general tax system.
Farmers will be able to deduct tax-deductible costs and settle VAT.
The state should encourage accounting in agriculture, which will increase the efficiency of agricultural production.
Increase in pensions and pensions from KRUS by PLN 200.
KRUS seal.
The KRUS system should be reformed to eliminate people who are not actually farmers.
Farmers paying income tax should be insured with ZUS.
Merger of the Agricultural Market Agency and the Agency for Restructuring and Modernization of Agriculture.
It is high time for institutional reform of agencies dealing with agricultural policy.
Employment at the Agency for Restructuring and Modernization of Agriculture amounts to nearly 10,000. people.
The Agricultural Market Agency employs approximately 1.3 thousand people. employees.
The best solution is to combine these agencies.
This will bring tangible savings, among others, thanks to job cuts (especially in managerial positions).
Reasonable management of state land,
preventing speculation and introducing regulations regulating land trade and preventing its uncontrolled purchase by foreign entities.
The Agricultural Property Agency should pursue a policy of giving land to farmers and agricultural cooperatives on a long-term lease to strengthen the Polish production potential.
Creation of one food safety agency – one institution instead of five.
We also propose a combination of inspections to ensure food safety.
Currently, inspections in this area are carried out by five state inspections, i.e. Verructual Inspections. These are the veterinary organs, the State Plant Health and Seed Inspection, the Trade Quality Inspection of Agricultural and Food Products, which are subordinated to the Minister of Agriculture, as well as the Trade Inspection, which is within the structures of the Office of Competition and Consumer Protection, and the State Sanitary Inspection, which is subordinate to the Minister of Health.
Restoration of structural pensions.
It is a tool that helps improve the agrarian structure.
Structural pensions should be complemented by support for young farmers who want to develop production on their farms.
Universal agricultural insurance system.
Creation of a truly universal agricultural production insurance system against all risks, supported by subsidies from the state budget.
Allocating funds from cohesion policy to improve the quality of life of residents of rural areas.
Funds from the Rural Development Program are used to develop transport, educational, health, cultural and sports infrastructure in rural areas.
By 2020, funds from cohesion policy should also be allocated for this purpose.
JUSTICE
The justice system only works efficiently when all parties are equal.
When everyone - regardless of wealth - can use the help of a qualified lawyer.
When everyone - regardless of where they live - has access to a court located nearby.
In a democratic country, justice is for everyone, not just the rich.
Creation of a system of free legal assistance.
We propose to base the system of free legal assistance on a system of tenders in which law firms, as well as non-governmental organizations and university legal clinics could participate.
Transferring divorce cases to district courts.
Facilitating access to the court for people from smaller towns.
Restoration of labor and social security departments in district courts.
During the eight years of rule of the PO-PSL coalition, the labor and social security departments were gradually liquidated.
Labor courts also fell victim to the liquidation of several dozen district courts by Minister Gowin.
The reform was reversed, but labor and social security departments were not restored in many cities.
Access to labor courts close to home is a guarantee of effective enforcement of employee rights.
The profession of a judge is the crown of the legal profession.
Possibility to become a judge after five years of practicing other legal professions.
Reinforcing the judiciary with people with practical legal experience.
Reducing the time of court proceedings.
This will be possible by simplifying the method of preparing justifications for judgments,
reform of the court expert system
and introducing the rule that judges can conduct paid training only if they set hearing dates at intervals of no longer than two months.
Solving the problem of court experts.
The new act should ensure: shortening the waiting time for expert opinions,
expanding the list of experts,
creation of clear criteria for obtaining the status of an expert and a system of control over the work of experts.
Completing the process of computerization of courts and prosecutor's offices.
This will facilitate the coordination of setting hearing dates and reduce the waiting time for the resolution of trials.
Making the rates for official legal aid more realistic.
Today, lawyers handling cases ex officio receive remuneration from the state that is inadequate to the work they contribute.
New act on the prosecutor's office.
Increasing the independence of individual prosecutors,
reducing the number of official prosecutors.
Changing the rules for assessing prosecutors.
Increasing the control function of the Sejm in the implementation of penal policy.
Providing assistance to crime victims after the trial.
Today, especially adults, are left to their own devices.
Ensuring effective law enforcement.
The lack of a law enforcement system is visible, for example, in relation to fathers who cannot enforce from their former partners the rules of visitation with the child, which were specified in the court decision.
Consideration of restoring the so-called municipal departments in district courts.
Combining minor and serious crime cases within one department does not facilitate the speed of proceedings and causes experienced judges to receive - in the order in which they are received - trivial cases.
ADMINISTRATION
Administration should serve citizens.
Every citizen must be treated subjectively in the office.
The target situation is a situation in which a citizen does not have to visit the office because he can handle all his affairs via the Internet.
Offices must be accessible and citizen-friendly, and information about their activities must be fully public.
Moving a large part of central offices outside Warsaw.
One way to achieve sustainable regional development is to deconcentrate central offices.
Such a model operates successfully in Germany.
The deconcentration of offices is associated with the development of the transport and telecommunications network between the new centers of central power and the capital.
This will influence the development of regions and improve the quality of life outside Warsaw.
Computerization of public administration.
Full computerization of public administration is a historical necessity.
In the era of universal access to the Internet, it should be a standard that every citizen can handle all official matters without leaving home.
Limiting the outsourcing of public services.
Public administration cannot operate like a private enterprise and be focused only on reducing the costs of its operations.
It is equally important to ensure that all its activities are consistent with the public interest and serve to achieve social goals that go beyond the tasks performed by individual administration bodies.
For these reasons, we believe that it is necessary to limit the possibility of delegating public tasks to private entities.
Experience shows that they are guided primarily by profit and, even if they strive to reduce costs, they do not guarantee appropriate employment standards for their employees.
Full implementation of the constitutional right of equal access to public service (Article 60 of the Constitution).
Every citizen who meets the qualification criteria should have a real right to apply for employment in public administration.
The regulations that regulate them should guarantee that recruitment for all positions will be open and competitive,
and the only criterion for selecting employees will be their substantive qualifications, not family or political connections.
Monitoring the accessibility of offices for disabled people, the elderly and families with small children
and implementation of a government program aimed at facilitating the spending of public funds.
Increasing salaries in public administration, in particular in local government administration.
The salaries of officials should be adequate to the importance of the tasks they perform, the responsibility they bear for them and social expectations as to their quality.
Decent remuneration for public administration employees is the best way to ensure that officials perform their duties to the satisfaction of citizens.
Full transparency of public administration activities.
The constitutional right to information about the activities of public authorities and persons performing public functions (Article 61 of the Constitution) must find appropriate guarantees in practice.
Real transparency of all official documents related to the spending of public funds should be ensured.
They should be available on the Internet (and not, for example, only available for inspection at the commune office) and described in a way that allows citizens to understand what they refer to.
A model to follow is the Norwegian portal with information about resources and processes in state and local government administration.
SOCIAL ASSISTANCE, FAMILY AND CARE BENEFITS
The state cannot leave anyone without help.
We are a community, and this means that we must help those members who need such help.
In these uncertain times, each of us may need a helping hand from the state.
Increasing the income criterion entitling to social assistance and family benefits to the social minimum level.
Currently, it is slightly higher than the subsistence minimum.
For a single person it amounts to PLN 634, for a person in a family - a maximum of PLN 514.
The social minimum in a single-person household is PLN 1,057.
Per person in the family - a minimum of PLN 821 (amount of benefits as of October 1, 2015).
Raising the family allowance for poor families to PLN 300, as well as indexing its allowances.
Currently, it ranges from PLN 89 to PLN 129 per child in the family, depending on his or her age.
A flexible income criterion applied not only to family allowance, but also to social assistance benefits and care benefits.
People who slightly exceed the criterion should not lose support, but only have it reduced by the amount by which the threshold was exceeded.
Strengthening the staff of social welfare institutions.
This should come through funding, supervision and training so that social workers can work more and more effectively in the field with people, families and communities affected by marginalization
Further development of the institution of a family assistant for dysfunctional families and families at risk of having their children taken away.
Family assistants should work systematically in each commune, employed under an employment contract and with a small number of families per assistant.
Reform of the support system for foster care children becoming independent.
The changes should be aimed at activation and psychological support,
and providing sheltered housing for people leaving foster care.
Creation of a system of care for the elderly.
Due to demographic changes, increasing expenditure on long-term care by introducing universal care insurance (based on the German model), supplementing budget financing
and the establishment of a long-term care fund in which the currently dispersed funds for care purposes would be collected.
Nursing home system.
Development of state-subsidized home and specialist care services for people requiring assistance in everyday functioning and running a household.
Nursing benefits for all caregivers of people unable to live independently, regardless of age.
Currently, they are only available to parents of disabled children.
Changes in the labor code allowing for the reconciliation of long-term care with professional work (e.g. the right to care leave, flexible, shortened working hours or telework).
Extending the right to unemployment benefits after the end of care to people who took care of disabled loved ones for years and were left destitute after their death.
Creation of information, advice, training and integration centers for caregivers of people requiring 24-hour care in each commune
Respite leave (replacement care) for carers of disabled and elderly people for the duration of treatment, rehabilitation or rest of the carer.
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
There are over 4 million people with disabilities in Poland.
The state should address them with a special care offer.
Take care of their right to full participation in public, social, cultural and sports life.
Increasing budgetary resources for the activation of people with disabilities on the labor market.
Today, only 13.5% of all disabled people of working age are gainfully employed, which is almost 40 percentage points lower than in the case of all Poles.
Increasing funds for the employment of people with disabilities in public offices.
Pursuant to applicable law, they are obliged to employ disabled people so that they constitute 6% of the employed staff.
Currently, in public offices this ratio is 3.7%.
This means that public offices pay fines for their reluctance to employ disabled people.
Introduction of a voucher for people requiring all-day care.
Dependent people could, according to their own choice, use the funds from the voucher to pay for care services.
Equalization of benefits for caregivers of people with disabilities.
Guardians should have the same rights regardless of whether they are caring for a minor or an adult, and these changes should not lead to a reduction in the benefits currently available to any of these groups.
The educational subsidy should directly "follow" a student with a disability and be allocated to meet his or her needs.
PFRON seal.
An efficiently functioning Fund is a guarantee of protection of the rights of people with disabilities.
Promoting the integration of children with disabilities in kindergartens and schools.
Taking actions to increase the safety of social workers.
SECULAR STATE
The separation of Church and State and freedom of conscience and religion are the foundations of the modern, democratic order that the United Left undertakes to protect.
They are expressed in legal acts in force in Poland, and above all in Art. 25 of the Constitution, which talks about the impartiality of the state in matters of religious beliefs and the mutual autonomy of the State and the Church, as well as in Art. 10 of the Act of May 17, 1989 on the Guarantees of Freedom of Conscience and Religion, which states: "The Republic of Poland is a secular state, neutral in matters of religion and belief."
These regulations must be enforced.
Poles should feel every day that the Republic of Poland is a secular state.
Liquidation of the Church Fund.
It was created to compensate the Church for material losses incurred in connection with the takeover of part of the church property by the state after the war.
And he performed this function until the end of the existence of the People's Republic of Poland.
However, after 1989, this property was returned to the Church - often with a surplus.
In such a situation, the Church Fund has lost its raison d'être and should be liquidated.
Currently, the Fund's budget is PLN 118 million.
Most of it is used to pay the social insurance of clergy.
Taking religion lessons out of schools.
This will save over PLN 1.2 billion annually and will contribute to maintaining the secular character of Polish schools.
Protecting the dignity of non-denominational students and representatives of religious minorities.
Financing catechesis for children and youth from church funds.
Catechesis should be financed by churches and religious associations.
Protecting the secular character of public institutions.
We will guard the secular character of schools, hospitals and courts.
Financing the education of clergy exclusively from church funds.
The education of priests should be an internal matter of churches and religious associations.
Protection of the dignity of religious minorities and non-religious people.
Opposition to treating religious minorities and non-religious people as second-class citizens.
Removal of the crime of insulting religious feelings from the Penal Code.
In a secular state, the protection of religious feelings should be the subject of interest of civil courts.
Liquidation of chaplain positions, except for barracks units.
Today, the Ordinariate of the Polish Army costs the budget PLN 15 million, hospital chaplains PLN 3 million, prison chaplains PLN 2.4 million, chaplains in the Fire Brigade, Border Guard, Police, BOR: approximately PLN 2 million.
Taxation of priests with income tax.
The average income tax for Polish men and women is PLN 2,184.
The average income tax paid by a Catholic priest in Poland is PLN 236, which is ten times less than paid by lay people.
CIVIL RIGHTS
We want a country where all citizens feel at home.
Therefore, we support the effective protection of the rights of all citizens by the state,
combating all forms of discrimination and implementing the principle of equality towards all, in particular due to gender, age, health condition, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, economic status, worldview, religion, non-denominationalism, race or ethnic origin.
Our goal is to restore the state's responsibility for the implementation of all rights and freedoms of its citizens and to strengthen its policy in this area.
Full ratification of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Poland's denunciation of the so-called the British Protocol to the Lisbon Treaty, under which Poles cannot assert their rights guaranteed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights before national courts and the Court of Justice of the European Union.
Women's rights are part of universal human rights, and their full implementation, leading to the abolition of discrimination based on gender, is a condition for good quality democracy.
To achieve this goal, it is necessary to conduct a policy that takes into account the interests of women and men, i.e. gender mainstreaming policy.
The right to freedom of choice and decision-making about oneself.
We demand that women be given the opportunity to decide whether, how many and when they want to have children.
We want to abolish the so-called anti-abortion law.
In Poland, abortion procedures are performed underground, often in conditions that are dangerous to the woman's health.
At the same time, abortion becomes the privilege of wealthy women who can afford to pay for the procedure abroad or use the services of the underground.
We demand an end to abortion hypocrisy and granting all Polish women the right to terminate their pregnancies.
If such a procedure is contrary to a woman's conscience, she does not have to decide on it.
In a democratic state of law, no one can decide about another person's conscience.
Sex education in schools is the implementation of the right to knowledge and should be available to children and young people at all levels of education.
It should be adapted to the age and perception capabilities of children, carried out by people with appropriate education, based on the latest state of scientific knowledge.
Reimbursement of contraception.
Today, only wealthy people can afford conscious family planning.
The state should make it possible for everyone, regardless of their level of wealth.
Act on civil partnerships.
An act covering heterosexual and homosexual couples.
The task of the state is to create conditions and establish institutions that make it easier for citizens to realize their desires and aspirations.
Civil partnerships are legal in most EU countries, and in our part of Europe they have already been legalized in the Czech Republic, Estonia, Croatia and Slovenia.
Effective counteracting violence against women and children.
Help for victims and effective prosecution of perpetrators, inevitability of penalties for causing violence (including sexual violence).
Comprehensive training for services (police, prosecutor's office, courts) in helping victims of violence, as well as combating gender, sexual, racial and ethnic stereotypes.
Active anti-discrimination policy.
The state should counteract all forms of discrimination, in particular based on sex, age, health condition, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, economic status, worldview, beliefs, especially political ones, trade union membership, religion or non-denomination, race or ethnicity.
Creation of an anti-discrimination body compliant with EU directives, without which it is impossible to effectively prevent and combat discrimination.
Decriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana.
We need to fight drug gangs, not occasional marijuana users.
Introduction of a modern drug policy based on harm reduction and human rights.
CULTURE I MEDIA
The state should be the most important patron of culture.
At the same time, we must guard artistic freedom and protect artists against attempts at religious and political censorship.
The role of the state is to expand access to culture, therefore economic barriers to access to culture and art should be eliminated.
Access to culture for all.
In the case of cultural institutions subordinated to the minister and local governments, the founding body must control the price level in these institutions.
The second aspect of the accessibility of culture is its accessibility for disabled and elderly people.
Constant, high funding for culture.
State patronage of all fields of art.
Making artists independent of private donors, including business and political circles.
Allocating at least one percent of the state budget to culture.
Independence of cultural institutions.
The most important institutions – theaters, museums, collections – should remain under the responsibility of the state (Minister of Culture and Local Governments).
The state and its officials cannot evaluate works of culture according to their own ideological, religious or political criteria.
Citizen public media.
In addition to private media, there must be universal media in the public space, independent of financing from advertising and the ad hoc interests of political elites.
State support for cultural and social press.
The state should support the media as a forum for public debate on cultural and social issues.
The media also have a role to play as a patron of culture, expanding access to its resources and supporting creativity.
Public domain.
We will postulate shortening the periods of protection of intellectual property rights,
defend a broad interpretation of the concept of "fair private use", the right to quote or reus.
SPORT AND RECREATION
The state should primarily support mass sport - physical activity from preschool age until autumn.
Protection of allotment gardens.
Relaxation in allotment gardens is the basic form of recreation for nearly a million Poles.
Therefore, the state should provide them with special protection.
We put the interests of citizens above the interests of developers.
Tax relief for parents of children practicing sports.
Possibility to deduct from taxable income amounts allocated for children's participation in sports activities conducted by sports clubs.
Support for sports for people with disabilities.
A pitch, gymnasium and other sports equipment in each school.
Many educational institutions, especially in rural areas and small towns, still do not have adequate sports facilities to conduct physical education classes.
Preferential rates for student sports clubs and amateur sports clubs for renting public sports facilities.
Introduction of a universal sports and recreational activation program for older people.
Enabling all people over 60 years of age to participate in free recreational and sports activities.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
We want a Poland that develops in a sustainable and environmentally friendly way.
Protection of the public character of the State Forests and clear definition of the method of operation of this institution.
Separation of the production function from the educational and nature protection functions in the State Forests.
Support for renewable energy sources, prosumer energy and energy efficiency.
The air in Poland is among the most polluted in Europe, which is why Poles are more likely to suffer from lung and heart diseases and cancer.
Ban on hydraulic fracturing.
Fossil fuels should be extracted using methods that do not destroy the natural environment.
Hydraulic fracturing involves the consumption and irreversible contamination of huge amounts of water, the resources of which are limited in Poland, and as such, it is one of the most harmful methods to the environment.
Obligation to use pro-ecological clauses in public procurement.
Public money should not be spent on activities and investments that harm the environment.
Changing the role of the Ministry of the Environment, which now deals with economic matters and providing access to natural resources.
Meanwhile, the task of this ministry should be to protect nature, i.e. fauna and flora habitats in the country and in the Baltic Sea,
as well as improving the quality of the natural environment in which people live, including in particular activities to improve air quality in Poland.
Making the State Inspection of Environmental Protection a real ecological guard, working 24 hours a day and equipped with tools to control entities polluting the environment (e.g. burning waste in furnaces, not using catalytic converters in vehicles, throwing waste illegally, etc.). ).
Restoration of the provision on communes giving opinions on the creation of new national parks, combined with proportionally increased subsidies for communes for establishing a new park (so that the creation of new national parks would be budget-neutral for communes).
Restoring the proper role of spatial planning and urban planning.
These tasks should be transferred to the Ministry of the Environment along with the appointment of a secretary of state responsible for spatial planning in line with the requirements of sustainable development.
Preparation of a nationwide program for improving air quality, in particular combating "low emission" at sources.
These actions should include:
appropriate emission standards for boilers in households;
determining the quality of fuels that can be used in households;
mechanisms to eliminate illegal waste burning in furnaces.
Introduction of flood protection rules, taking into account natural retention and renaturization of rivers and watercourses.
A legal ban on development in flood areas should be introduced.
Public support for municipalities striving for energy self-sufficiency using energy efficiency and renewable energy sources.
Energy self-sufficiency of municipalities is a way to increase the state's energy security,
fight against energy poverty
and the development of energy democracy, i.e. regaining control over the production and distribution of energy by citizens.
Increasing financial outlays on thermal modernization of buildings.
Introducing the principle that at least 20% of food served in public canteens should come from organic farming.
This is a way to improve the health of people using these canteens,
and also one of the ways to support the development of organic farming, which is an opportunity for small family farms in Poland.
Maintaining opposition to GMO crops.
Adoption of the act on counteracting odor nuisance.
ANIMAL RIGHTS
Every living being has the right to protection, and our attitude towards animals is a measure of our humanity.
Strict compliance with applicable animal protection law.
Protecting experimental animals from unnecessary pain, suffering and stress.
Introducing a total ban on animal experimentation in secondary schools.
Limiting the use of stray animals, wild animals and primates to exceptional situations that require additional scientific justification.
Introducing the requirement to anesthetize animals in the case of the so-called simplified procedures – in the simplified procedure, it is possible to test on animals, e.g. chemicals, medical equipment, drugs.
Adaptation of animal breeding standards on farms to European standards, taking into account the necessary living conditions (living area, access to drinking water).
Supporting ecological and humane animal breeding.
Monitoring industrial farms in terms of animal welfare.
Prohibition of particularly inhumane methods of killing animals, e.g. without stunning.
Introduction of the obligation to microchip and externally mark pets (dogs and cats) and the obligation to castrate non-breeding animals.
Prevention of pathologies in animal shelters.
Immediate withdrawal of licenses from shelters that have been proven to be improperly performing their functions.
Statutory protection of children from observing animal suffering during hunting.
SECURITY OF THE STATE AND CITIZENS
State security is multidimensional.
It cannot be identified only with military security.
The state must guarantee citizens, above all, personal security and protect them against interference both from other entities and unjustified actions of public authorities.
Poland cannot be a country ruled by uncontrolled secret services!
Security also means certainty and stability in access to basic, strategic services on which the proper functioning of social and economic life depends (energy, transport).
Providing it is also the state's obligation.
Support for bipartisan consensus on national security.
A police station in each commune as an element of prevention and increasing the level of security.
Increasing the salaries of officers.
Annual indexation of salaries in all uniformed services at least by the inflation rate.
In the Police, introduction of a permanent allowance for service on weekends and holidays as well as payments for participation in securing high-risk events.
Real judicial control over the use of operational control by secret services and other authorized entities.
Special organizational units should be established in district courts with full powers to control operational activities.
Individual criminal liability should be introduced for a service officer storing material collected during surveillance that was not used in court.
Actual control over the secret services.
We propose to equip the Parliamentary Committee for Secret Services with investigative powers and the right to issue opinions on budgetary resources for tasks arising from Art. 5 of the Act on the Internal Security Agency and the Intelligence Agency.
Creation of one office carrying out purchases and supplies for the needs of all uniformed services.
This model is used in many Western European countries.
This solution will contribute to increasing savings when purchasing equipment for uniformed services.
Development of allied cooperation within NATO and the European Union and friendly partnership with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
Strengthening the economic security of the state, including in the energy and financial dimensions.
Modernization and development of the Armed Forces in order to increase the defense potential with the participation of national arms plants, universities and research institutes.
Adopting the principle that at least 50% of defense budget expenditure, which is allocated to purchases and modernization of infrastructure, goes to Polish companies.
Strengthening the industrial complex producing for the needs of the army and other uniformed services.
Preparing the country to protect against cyberattacks.
Many countries (USA, Japan, Germany, Great Britain, Israel, Saudi Arabia) have created special military structures to protect the state against cyberattacks.
Poland also needs to ensure the efficient and safe operation of energy, water, supplies and communications.
THE FOREIGN POLICY
Poland should be a country pursuing a peaceful foreign policy.
We must strive to build good relations with all our neighbors.
Poland has historically performed poorly in playing the role of a "bulwark".
The role of a bridge between the East and the West was much more beneficial for us.
We should also play it today, as a full member of the European Union and striving to deepen integration within it.
European Federation.
The right way out of the economic and political crisis that has been going on for several years is the creation of a European federation whose entities would be not only nation states, but above all citizens.
A European federation must mean that decisions are taken at the right level - European, national or local.
This must happen in a fully democratic way, with the participation of various environments and social groups.
Deepening economic integration.
Joining the euro zone at a favorable moment from the point of view of the interests of our country and the benefits for its citizens.
Development of comprehensive cooperation with neighbors.
Strengthening close relations with Germany, the Visegrad Group countries and the Baltic republics, as well as an active eastern policy.
Striving for stabilization and positive development of relations with the Russian Federation (especially in the social and economic dimension),
support for the development of Ukraine,
neighborly cooperation with Belarus.
Opening diplomacy to developing countries.
Dynamisation of contacts, especially socio-economic ones, with rapidly developing countries and regions in Asia (led by China, India, ASEAN countries), Latin America and Africa.
Seeking to democratize international relations, primarily by emphasizing the role of international law
and building an active EU development policy
and other international organizations, led by the United Nations system.
Limiting the use of force in international relations.
The primacy of peaceful methods of resolving international conflicts.
Military missions outside the country only with the consent of the Sejm of the Republic of Poland (does not apply to UN and EU peacekeeping missions).
Striving for the transformation of the international financial and economic order.
Reform of international institutions operating in these areas.
Market regulation also at the global and regional level.
Sensible policy towards immigrants.
When accepting economic immigrants, we should take into account the situation on the Polish labor market and the professional qualifications of people who want to live in Poland.
Opening up to immigrants is justified by demographic trends over the last 25 years.
One of the elements of immigration policy should be the creation of a network of Polish cultural institutes in countries with high emigration potential.
A Europe in solidarity with and towards refugees.
People fleeing war and political persecution should be helped.
Poles – victims of persecution and war – have been welcomed by third countries many times in history.
Therefore, Poland should accept people fleeing from war, while ensuring their social integration and protection of public safety.
The costs of maintaining refugees should be borne by the European Union.
