A good state serves the people
#NETWORK plan for the period 2016-2020
Plan #network For 2016-2020
White zone
The way to a good state
10 basic commitments of #NETWORK
The first 100 days of the government
#1 we will create the conditions for the material responsibility of politicians
and we will exclude mailbox companies from the public space
#2 through tax relief, we will increase the income of an ordinary Slovak family by 500 euros per year
#3 we will abolish unnecessary obligations for employers and their employees, especially the loss tax, mandatory retraining of drivers and mandatory health care where it makes no sense
within two years
#1 we will provide parents of children from three years of age with a legal guarantee of a place in a kindergarten
#2 we will combine the financial support of working parents into one parental account in the amount of 12,000 euros per child
#3 we will reduce contributions by 500 euros per year for each employee and self-employed person
#4 we will greatly speed up the construction of expressways, especially in Orava, Zemplín, Gemeri and Upper Nitra
until 2020
#1 We invest 30% more in our children's education
#2 we will create conditions for increasing the share of Slovak food on the domestic market to 80 percent
#3 we will fundamentally shorten the waiting time for medical procedures blue zone good state serves people main plans
Blue zone
A good state serves the people
Mainly Plans #network for people
Employers, tradesmen and farmers
The first 100 days
#The network will act harder against chronic bill defaulters.
Failure to pay an invoice to a self-employed person will have the same criminal penalty as failure to pay wages to employees.
#The network will promote a simpler business environment.
We will make changes to business laws that will save employers tens of millions a year in administrative costs.
An example is the cancellation of tax licenses for business companies, the limitation of mandatory health service only to risky occupations, the cancellation of retraining of drivers and tour tickets.
We will help regional economies through Regional Economic Zones (REZ), which will be created in regions with high unemployment.
We will introduce the One Date measure, which would mean for all entrepreneurs that the state could change the legislation regarding taxes, levies and various regulatory and administrative burdens only once a year, i.e. on January 1.
One meeting of the National Council of the Slovak Republic per year will be dedicated only to simplifying legislation.
We will enforce a reduction in the levy burden by 500 euros for each employee and SZČO, up to a saving of 25,000 euros per year.
We will prevent the repetition of fraudulent restructurings and the abuse of bankruptcies.
The debtor's ability to propose a restructuring administrator will be removed, and box companies will automatically be considered related parties to the debtor.
within two years
#The network will support artisans and farmers by substantially increasing the limit on flat-rate expenses.
We will enforce the One Meter measure, which will mean a balance in the relationship between the taxpayer and the state.
By using the one meter rule, they achieve, for example, that if the state illegally does not refund the VAT deductions to the entrepreneur, the entrepreneur must get them back with interest.
We will adopt a new law on public procurement, the aim of which will be easier, faster and more efficient purchases with our common money.
until 2020
We will simplify the tax system.
We will reduce the number of VAT rates and exemptions and remove anomalies where, for example, a self-employed person pays a higher rate of income tax than a large business.
We will unify the collection of taxes and social contributions into a unified system and prepare the abolition of health contributions.
For small entrepreneurs with a turnover of up to EUR 20,000, the #Network will offer a voluntary One Payment system, which will replace all levy and tax obligations and communication with the authorities.
We will introduce a set of measures that will reduce bureaucracy.
The One Stamp measure guarantees that it is possible to start a business in one day and it can be handled in one place.
With the One Office measure, we will ensure the availability of the services of the most used offices under one roof in each district.
We will also promote accelerated electronicization of the state administration.
If the state administration has already requested certain information from a citizen, it may not request it again.
We will create legislative and fiscal conditions for increasing the share of Slovak food on the domestic market to 80 percent, and we will enable the use of home-made food, organic food and ingredients in the preparation of food in restaurants and other establishments from small regional farms and from home production, thereby supporting local farmers.
employees
The first 100 days We will enforce the constitutional protection of the percentage of levies going to the 2nd pillar, so that governments cannot change them at will,
but also solidarity in the form of a minimum pension and the freedom to dispose of the saved funds.
We will eliminate discrimination against savers, whose pensions from the first pillar are cut by the state much more than they should.
We will simplify the tax system and lower income tax for all working families.
We believe that money should be left in the families who know best how to handle it.
We will therefore push for an increase in the tax bonus by 120 euros per child and the tax-free base for each adult by 680 euros.
This measure will bring 500 euros annually to a family of four with two children.
We will ensure fairer and more dignified working conditions for health workers after their long-term efforts.
within two years
We will introduce measures to help working parents reconcile work and family - shared OCR;
a small form of earnings exempt from taxes and levies for parents of young children;
work from home, or so-called micro-business and micro-work as forms of income from small, occasional activities performed while caring for a child up to the age of 6.
until 2020
#The network will support public employees with the following measures:
We will adopt a new civil service law that will ensure clear and realistic separation of non-political and civil service levels in the civil service.
We will assert the position of the teacher as a professional with an adequate support service
and we will open the market for textbooks and teaching materials.
We will put into practice the principles of career growth, which will be valid for all members of the police force.
seniors
The first 100 days
We will end an era that can be called the Republic of Foreclosures, where the number and cost of foreclosures against ordinary people continues to grow.
We will operationalize personal bankruptcy, increase the quality and control of the state over bailiffs, and push for the consolidation of enforcement proceedings.
We will start opening up and making Slovak culture more accessible.
In the first phase, we will allow entry to museums and galleries for free, for example by expanding the applicability of cultural vouchers for seniors.
within two years
By limiting monopolistic behavior, we will increase availability and create conditions for a fundamental reduction in the prices of over-the-counter medicines.
We will promote the introduction of preventive health programs for seniors.
We will support the development and implementation of the Geriatric Patient Care Program.
We will push for the creation of a central independent assessment activity that will be more economically advantageous, administratively undemanding and easily accessible for insured persons, persons with disabilities and applicants for the provision of social services.
We will remove the situation where, on the one hand, there are disproportionately long waiting periods for the allocation of a social service in a residential facility, and on the other hand, non-public social service providers have free capacities.
We will introduce a new model of financing the home care service, where we will allow citizens to freely decide whether to choose a residential form of social service or a home care service.
We will ensure the transition to a new philosophy in healthcare, which will be based on measuring the quality of healthcare provided.
The publication of waiting lists will be mandatory so that the patient can move to a provider with a shorter wait.
until 2020
We will promote the reduction of energy poverty
and we start development programs to reduce the burden on socially weak population groups.
parents
The first 100 days
We will introduce a guarantee of a place in the kindergarten for children from 3 years of age.
We will implement this measure in the form of cooperation between municipalities and private kindergartens registered in the network of schools in the Slovak Republic.
If the municipality does not provide a place for a child from the age of 3 immediately after the 2016 elections, the parents will receive compensation from the municipality in the amount of the parental allowance.
We will enforce an increase in the tax bonus by 120 euros per child and the tax-free base for each adult by 680 euros.
This measure will bring 500 euros annually to a family of four with two children.
within two years
We will enable the creation of the so-called children's groups, which are a more flexible and cheaper alternative to private nurseries for children under 3 years old.
We will ensure that kindergartens can have a more flexible childcare time, which will be adapted to the time possibilities of working parents.
We will replace the tangle of administratively difficult-to-access allowances for parents with small children with a single Parental Account, which will enable them to flexibly and easily obtain finances for their family.
Each child will have a single sum of 12,000 euros in their account before the birth of their offspring, from which working parents will be able to choose according to their current needs, but with such restrictions as to prevent abuse.
We will introduce measures to help working parents reconcile work and family - shared OCR;
a small form of earnings exempt from taxes and levies for parents of young children;
work from home, or so-called micro-business and micro-work as forms of small-time earnings,
occasional activity performed while caring for a child up to the age of 6.
We will ensure the availability of health specialists so that the patient does not have to travel more than a certain distance and wait more than a certain time.
The general health insurance company will financially motivate doctors to extend office hours.
We will support student-oriented education.
Services to equalize the chances for all children (special educator, speech therapist, assistant, appropriate modifications of the educational program and many others) must be available and eligible for all children who need them.
until 2020
We will increase the construction of rental apartments by improving the conditions for wider involvement of non-state actors and municipalities in the construction process and prevent them from falling out of the housing stock.
By 2020, we will increase funding for education by at least 30%.
young people
The first 100 days
We will improve the awareness of university students about their rights.
Together with the students, we will formulate a student's bill of rights, which will establish the standard of services to which they are entitled.
within two years
We will guarantee transparency, functionality and stability in the rules of higher education accreditation.
We will fundamentally reform the principles and criteria for assessing the competence of universities and the evaluation criteria for their activities,
as well as the career and salary system in universities so that experts from practice and foreign experts can get into the key positions of professors and associate professors.
In vocational education, we will increase the emphasis on the practical preparation of students for their future profession.
We will allow students in dual education to earn an income from the first day of starting education.
We will enforce that, during teaching, appropriate emphasis is also placed on the development of key competencies that are necessary for an active civic and social life.
We will enable teaching teams in secondary schools to cooperate more intensively with external experts from practice without unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles.
until 2020
We will provide affordable rental housing.
We will increase the construction of rental apartments by improving the conditions for wider involvement of non-state actors and municipalities in the construction process in cooperation with the state and prevent them from falling out of the housing stock.
The goal is to ensure a several times larger number of rental apartments, which will serve, for example, as so-called "Reflective" housing for young people, or will enable higher labor mobility.
We will increase the education budget by at least 30% by 2020.
We will support changes in the content of study fields at universities, the so-called descriptions.
We will support changes that take more into account the needs of the labor market and increase the pressure to strengthen the compulsory practice of students during their studies.
In the final years, we will support the development of professional and advisory services for students, which will be aimed at identifying their strengths and at advising on choosing a suitable high school and university and future profession.
We will support the building of a system of transparent grant schemes to support high-quality university research teams.
We will implement a comprehensive change of the Research Support Agency and increase its funding.
For students of legal professions, we will push for the abolition of the institute of judicial waiting and
we will increase the attractiveness of the profession of a senior court official through a combination of better salary evaluation and professional content.
We will also increase the openness of the legal professions by reducing the mandatory minimum terms for newcomers to 3 years, but we will maintain or increase the difficulty of the final exam so that only a high-quality applicant can successfully pass it.
people with specific needs
within two years
#The Network will ratify and continue to implement the Comprehensive Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
In schools, we will start from the first day to create conditions for teachers to work more intensively with children on an individual level and help them improve.
Regardless of whether the child comes from a functioning family or from a less stimulating environment, whether it is an exceptionally gifted child, with a disability, a learning and behavioral disorder, or a "problem-free" child - we are all about each and all at the same time .
Services to equalize the chances for all children (special educator, speech therapist, assistant, appropriate modifications of the educational program and many others) must be available and eligible for all children who need them.
Funds to cover them will be tied not to the school, but to a specific child.
We will push for the creation of a central independent assessment activity that will be more economically advantageous, administratively easy and easily accessible for insured persons, persons with disabilities and applicants for the provision of social services.
We will remove the situation where, on the one hand, there are disproportionately long waiting periods for the allocation of a social service in a residential facility, and on the other hand, non-public social service providers have free capacities.
We will introduce a new model of financing the home care service, where we will allow citizens to freely decide whether to choose a residential form of social service or a home care service.
Once socially excluded communities are defined in law, we will establish claimable funding for services provided in these locations to ensure the financial stability of the programs.
We will propose the creation of a group of experts consisting of a health assistant, a field social worker, a member of the police force and possibly a Roma volunteer for each socially excluded community.
#The network will also propose the standardization of field and community social work, which will increase employability.
#The network will propose a project that will ensure higher employment and housing for poor citizens and residents of socially excluded locations through the construction of family houses and the creation of sustainable jobs for all poor and socially excluded communities.
until 2020
#The network will advocate for the gradual reduction of the number of children in orphanages, so that as many children as possible can be raised in their own or surrogate families.
Red zone Slovakia 2016-2020
Program guidelines #NETWORK for the period 2016-2020
# 1 public finances and cleaning of public space
The first 100 days
#The network will push for the introduction of material liability of public officials for the illegal use of public resources and the introduction of the principle of good stewardship as a basic criterion for assessing violations of legality.
Already today, laws oblige managers in private companies to "perform their duties with professional care and in accordance with the interests of the company."
In particular, they are obliged to acquire and, when making a decision, take into account all available information regarding the subject of the decision, and when performing their duties, they must not prioritize their interests, the interests of only some partners or the interests of third parties over the interests of the company."
A similar principle should apply to all public officials handling public power or public resources, so that it can no longer be said: "It's wrong, but it was in accordance with the law."
#The network will enforce a real anti-boxing law that will prohibit companies with unknown or unproven ownership from doing any business with the state, not only in public procurement, but also in Eurofunds, subsidies, sale and purchase of property and any other state transaction.
At the same time, such companies should not be able to circumvent regulations in the field of bankruptcy and restructuring, banking regulation or paying taxes with impunity.
#The network will enforce a strict spending policy, according to which the state must spend taxpayers' funds with a strict emphasis on economy, efficiency, and effectiveness.
There is room for savings or better use of existing resources mainly in public procurement, European funds, limiting tax evasion, and the costs of serving the state.
The Ministry of Finance will carry out audits of the biggest spending holes in the departments, but not to issue black books about it, but to push for their filling.
#The network will push for tying the increase in the spending of individual budget chapters to demonstrate economical, efficient, and effective use of public funds in the past, as well as to credible, concrete, and measurable commitments for the future.
#The network follows the principle that it is better to get money for the state budget through efficiency and savings than through higher taxes for ordinary people.
Money should be left in the families that know how to use it best.
Therefore, the #Network will push for an increase in the tax bonus by 120 euros per child and the tax-free base for each adult by 680 euros, which will directly increase the standard of living of families.
This measure is described in more detail in the next chapter.
#Network to introduce disclosure of excess VAT deductions to tackle VAT refund fraud, as well as parliamentary scrutiny of the way tax directorates are run.
#The network will enforce a reduction in the levy burden by 500 euros for each employee and SZČO, up to 25,000 euros of savings per year.
within two years
#The network will stand up for the constitutional guarantee of free choice of public service and its availability.
#The network will enforce fundamental changes to the constitutional law on the protection of the public interest in relation to the highest public officials, such as ministers, deputies, directors of the most important public institutions or enterprises.
It will adjust more detailed property declarations, which will allow not only to know the property of public officials, but especially to really compare whether it develops in accordance with the declared income.
It will also introduce the principle: "Give it to the state or give it to the state" in property declarations.
Assets that a public official does not declare in violation of the law are automatically forfeited to him upon discovery.
It will remove the opportunity for government politicians to cover up illegal actions, as is happening today.
#The network will introduce the possibility of challenging such inactivity of the responsible authorities by appealing to the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic, which will have the final word.
At the same time, however, the #Network will reform the harassing and dysfunctional asset declarations for about 135,000 rank-and-file public employees.
Today, they must be filed not only by those for whom it makes sense, such as judges, prosecutors, police officers, or officials in important positions, but also by every firefighter or rank-and-file clerk at the labor office.
We did not find a single case where the public employee's property declaration would lead to his punishment.
We therefore propose to narrow the range of obliged persons to approximately 40,000 persons.
These employees will fill out a standardized questionnaire that will have a real informative value.
#The network will enforce the rule of one website for both the state and local government.
Today, there are central websites for public procurement or state contracts, but in many areas such a portal is missing or incomplete.
We will therefore push for the state to have one functional web portal for each area (e.g. recruitment procedures for employees, sale of public property, European funds and grants...).
The responsible institution will have the obligation to publish the information on the relevant central website.
If he publishes them there (for example, a call for project submissions on the website for European funds), he does not have to publish it anywhere else.
At the same time, citizens will be sure that they will find everything in one place.
#The network will enforce the principle that all meetings of public authorities are public and will limit the possibility of withholding information from the public.
Non-publicity will be the exception to the rule, not the other way around.
At the same time, the basic rules of public participation in decision-making will be enshrined in the constitution.
The proposal will also include the possibility of a legislative initiative for citizens, when the NR SR will have to negotiate a law that will be signed by at least 50,000 citizens.
#The network will fundamentally strengthen the government's transparency towards municipalities, but also within the municipality itself.
We will enforce the strengthening of claimable and transparently distributed resources for self-government in exchange for the fact that municipalities take over the so-called kindergarten guarantee.
However, we will also enforce the tying of the remaining state aid to local governments, including European funds, for the introduction of measures modeled on the Transparent City project, which was introduced in Martin by Andrej Hrnčiar in cooperation with Transparency International Slovakia.
We will leave the self-government free in what set of measures it chooses, but we will condition the state's financial aid on obtaining a certain number of points in the transparency evaluation, which will be allocated by the Ministry of Finance.
#The network will enforce a new law on public procurement, the aim of which will be easier, faster and more efficient purchases with our common money.
#In it, the Network will enforce the strengthening of competition so that it is not possible to announce procurements tailored to one bidder and will increase the responsibility of the procuring entity for the outcome of the procurement within the framework of the already mentioned rule of good stewardship.
#The Network will unblock large procurements, through which the largest part of public funds pass, by proposing to introduce a special body staffed by international experts to supervise large procurements (above 10 million euros) with a clear decision-making schedule and the final word.
#The network will also push for strengthening the power of procuring agents against fraudsters and low-quality suppliers and making the law more flexible for small procurers and small contracts, including support for local suppliers.
until 2020
#The network will adopt a new law on the civil service, which will ensure a clear and realistic separation of political and bureaucratic levels in the civil service.
In the case of political nominees, there should be clear political responsibility (appointment by a specific minister), a high degree of transparency about the terms of employment (what salary and for what) and clear rules regarding conflicts of interest (property declarations, independent review).
In the case of choosing career officials, we should be inspired by the model used by the European Commission.
Within this model, there will be a uniform list of people who have met the qualitative conditions for entering the civil service in terms of demanding intellectual, knowledge and psychological criteria.
"Sifting" will be done by an independent body.
In this way, it will not be possible for unqualified people to enter the civil service, for whom it is enough to buy a diploma from the "right" school and acquire membership in the "right" political party or family.
At the same time, the performance of officials should be subject to an annual evaluation, which will depend on the salary evaluation and the possibility of dismissal from the civil service.
#The network will push for Slovakia to become the country with the fastest and highest quality draw of European funds by 2020.
This can only be achieved by destroying today's corrupt Eurofund chain of relationships and establishing simplicity, claimability and transparency as fundamental principles.
The priority must be to eliminate the "handlers" of European funds.
In addition to changing the key people responsible for the current situation, this can be helped in particular by fundamental debureaucratization and the introduction of claimability for all applicants who meet the prescribed conditions.
At the same time, the enforcement of three cross-cutting measures - the rule of one website, is of fundamental importance for European funds.
public procurement reform a
material liability of public officials.
# 2 Practical help for families
The first 100 days
#The network will introduce a guarantee of a place in kindergarten for children from 3 years old.
We will implement this measure in the form of cooperation between municipalities and private kindergartens registered in the network of school facilities of the Slovak Republic - if the municipality has the full capacity of public facilities, it will be given the opportunity to contract this private kindergarten.
It will offer its unused capacities to the parents of children who were not admitted to municipal kindergartens, in such a way that the parent does not pay anything extra compared to the fees for municipal kindergartens.
#The network will also introduce the so-called children's groups, which are a more flexible and cheaper alternative to private nurseries for younger children from 0 to 3 years old.
The municipality can also use the services of children's groups, whose task will be not only care, but also education of children, and they will be operated only by a person professionally and medically qualified for this activity.
Children's groups should find their use especially in areas where they are not close to kindergartens and would contribute to a gradual change in the social climate and outlook on upbringing and education.
The measure will be implemented through an increase in share taxes for municipalities and will be linked to an effective system for controlling the number of unadopted children in the municipality.
If the municipality does not provide a place for a child from the age of 3 immediately after the 2016 elections, the parents will receive compensation from the municipality in the amount of the parental allowance.
within two years
#The network will replace the tangle of administratively difficult-to-access allowances for parents with small children with a single Parental Account, which will enable them to obtain finances for their family flexibly and without administrative burden.
Before the birth of the offspring, each child will have a single sum of EUR 12,000 in the account, from which working parents will be able to choose according to their current needs, but with such restrictions as to prevent abuse.
#The network will push for an increase in the tax bonus by 120 euros per child and the tax-free base for each adult by 680 euros.
This measure will directly increase the standard of living of families, who will have more money left over from their earnings.
This measure will bring 500 euros annually to a family of four with two children.
#The network will introduce measures to help working parents reconcile work and family - shared OCR;
a small form of earnings exempt from taxes and levies for parents of young children;
work from home;
guarantee of returning to the original workplace after maternity leave;
flexible working hours;
tax credits for employers hiring women over 50 and mothers with young children, etc.
#The network will simplify the decree on kindergartens so that kindergartens can have more flexible childcare hours, which will be adapted to the time possibilities of working parents, and so that they cannot be closed during the summer holidays without providing substitute care.
Kindergartens will be able to be open longer, even until later in the evening if parents need it.
They will also be able to enroll children in the morning or afternoon educational program much more flexibly.
Kindergartens will consult with each parent about their workload.
#The network will introduce the so-called micro-business and micro-work as a form of earning from small, occasional activities carried out while caring for a child up to the age of 6, while this work should only serve for extra income and as an opportunity to remain in a working rhythm that corresponds to the needs of the parent and the child throughout the time care until starting a regular employment relationship or establishing a regular business.
The amount of annual income from such an activity, which will not be subject to taxation or levy obligations (the parent would not be forced to start a business, for example), should not exceed €3,000.
At the same time, the parent will not lose child benefits.
until 2020
#The network will advocate for equal pension sharing between spouses to be the starting rule when getting married.
#The network will arrange for Slovak maternity hospitals to raise their level and provide maternity services to international standards.
#The network will advocate for the adoption of comprehensive measures to combat domestic violence.
Every woman and her children must find a safe place to escape from domestic violence.
They must be provided with professional assistance from the police, courts and social workers, as well as better law enforcement.
#The network will provide affordable rental housing in two ways.
We will increase the construction of rental apartments by improving the conditions for the wider involvement of non-state actors (churches, non-profit organizations and private individuals) and municipalities in the construction process in cooperation with the state and prevent them from falling out of the housing stock.
The goal is to ensure a many times greater number of rental apartments, which will serve, for example, as so-called "Reflective" housing for young people, or will enable higher labor mobility.
We will also tighten the minimum transparency rules for the allocation of rental apartments.
As part of the use of the institute, the so-called replacement alimony #The Network will amend the law so that when the debtor pays any amount of missed mandatory alimony to the entitled beneficiary, the latter will not be forced to return this amount to the Labor Office, unless this amount relates to the period in which the beneficiary already used the institution of substitute alimony.
This means that the law will clearly determine the period to which the part of the alimony payment in arrears refers.
# 3 Helping the regions
The first 100 days
#The network will limit the provision of all investment incentives in cash form throughout Slovakia.
Instead, we will help regional economies through Regional Economic Zones (REZ).
REZ will be created in regions with high unemployment.
The created economic zones at the district level will have special and blanket tax rules that will be set to attract new investments and create additional jobs even in already existing businesses and operations.
The rules will automatically apply to all entities that will invest and employ people in a given REZ.
The tool of this special tax policy will be, for example, the so-called faster and higher depreciation ("turbo depreciation") on costs associated with fixed investments and labor costs for the first two years of new operation, as well as costs associated with science and research up to 200%.
#The network wants to make a strong REZ with high unemployment and low salaries in the poor regions of Slovakia.
We will also redirect much larger funds from EU funds, the European Investment Bank, the Slovak Guarantee and Development Bank, the European Fund for Strategic Investments and the national budget to investment in the local road network, local farms, the construction of rental apartments, sports fields and the construction of digital networks, including municipal WIFI networks.
We will promote the deployment of public administration bodies across Slovakia.
In this way, we will contribute to a fairer distribution of opportunities between the regions to enable them to participate in the common work.
We will introduce a system of regional state secretaries of ministries.
We will push for ten state secretaries to serve in different cities of Slovakia.
We will also support the participation of the regions in the creation of national measures by introducing rules for the organization of out-of-town meetings of the government.
They will be held eight times a year, every six weeks in a different self-governing region.
within two years
#The network will change the electoral system so that multiple constituencies are introduced.
Today, citizens from the regions pay extra for one electoral district because Bratislava is overrepresented in the parliament and there is no territorial connection between the voter and the MP.
When deputies are elected in the regions, they will be motivated to work for the benefit of the citizens of their district.
The second change is accountability during the election period.
It is not enough to ask for a mandate once every four years and then rule undisturbed.
Voters should be able to say what they think about the performance of their representatives during the election period.
As they do in the case of impeachable mayors.
#The network will strengthen the role of municipalities and regions in making decisions about public services by further decentralizing them.
However, this requires the reorganization of the local government so that it is able to fulfill these tasks.
#The network unites the Bratislava VÚC and the capital city of Bratislava following the example of Prague or Vienna.
#The network will create legislative and fiscal conditions for increasing the share of Slovak food on the domestic market to 80 percent
and we will enable the use of home-grown food, BIO-food and ingredients in the preparation of food in restaurants and other establishments from small regional farms and from home production, thus supporting local farmers.
Currently, yard sales are only possible for end consumers.
In the European Union, it is common for restaurants to cook from local ingredients.
So we will abolish legislation in the field of hygiene requirements and other bureaucracy so that it does not go beyond the obligations set by the EU.
until 2020
To improve life in the regions, the #Network will prepare the conditions for building bypasses of traffic-congested settlements,
will improve public transport connections in remote regions,
will support the building of local and regional cycling routes,
water supply and sewerage.
A big problem for the regions is the road infrastructure.
People in the regions are not interested in welfare packages or economic statistics.
Only if highways, feeders and expressways are completed, we can expect a new wave of investments, because without accessible and high-quality roads, investors who can give people jobs and support the purchasing power of the entire region will not come.
The second dimension of the need for infrastructure is the attractiveness of life in the regions.
40% of Slovak citizens are without sewerage
and many endure traffic jams on their way to work and excessive traffic in their area of ​​residence.
#The network will responsibly review the promises of previous governments in connection with the construction of road infrastructure, depending on the real financial possibilities of the Slovak Republic, and will prepare new strategic planning documents that will be binding.
We will quickly build the roads that were prepared by the previous government (e.g. purchased land, projects) and we will actively prepare the construction of other roads so that construction can continue in the next election period.
#The network will pay special attention to the improvement of transport connections to regions that today are difficult to reach not only by road, but also by public rail and bus transport.
#Network will insist on reconsidering the restoration of train connections where they have been canceled and will support solutions for the best possible continuity of train and bus connections.
#The network will increase the share of Slovak food on the domestic market to 80 percent.
#The network will support the development of border regions by opening new border crossings for small border traffic and other ways of connecting border regions where it makes economic and logistical sense.
By increasing the permeability of the border, it will contribute to the improvement of the economic and social development of these regions, increase trade exchange and tourism.
#The network will streamline and simplify legislation for the funding of regional and regional tourism organizations, thereby increasing visitation and development in the regions.
We also do not forget about improving the conditions for mass tourism, for example ensuring access to forests, building campsites, mountain bike trails or shelters.
# 4 Free air for business
#The network will promote a simpler business environment.
We will make changes to business laws that will save employers tens of millions a year in administrative costs.
An example is the cancellation of tax licenses for business companies, the limitation of mandatory health service only to risky occupations, the cancellation of retraining of drivers and tour tickets.
For small entrepreneurs with a turnover of up to EUR 20,000, the #Network will offer a voluntary One Payment system, which will replace all levy and tax obligations and communication with the authorities.
#The network will introduce the One Date measure, which would mean for all entrepreneurs that the state could change the legislation related to taxes, levies and various regulatory and administrative burdens only once a year, i.e. on January 1.
Business is also hampered by the great complexity of laws.
One meeting of the National Council of the Slovak Republic per year will therefore be held during Lent - it will be dedicated only to simplifying legislation.
#The network will limit the provision of all investment incentives in cash form throughout Slovakia.
Instead, we will help regional economies through Regional Economic Zones (REZ), which will be created in regions with high unemployment.
The measure is described in more detail in the previous chapter.
#The network wants to replace various complicated schemes to support employment with the following - not to pay Social Insurance contributions for the unemployed as many months as the person was previously unemployed.
#The network will act harder against chronic bill defaulters.
Failure to pay an invoice to a self-employed person will have the same criminal penalty as failure to pay wages to employees.
within two years
#The network will implement the One Meter measure.
It will thereby enforce a balance in the relationship between the taxpayer and the state.
Today, for example, if an entrepreneur does not pay value added tax on time, he pays fines and faces criminal prosecution.
However, if the state has to return part of the tax to him, suddenly it does not apply.
By using the one meter rule, they achieve, for example, that if the state illegally does not refund the VAT deductions to the entrepreneur, the entrepreneur must get them back with interest.
#The network will limit VAT fraud by expanding the mechanism when VAT is remitted by the recipient (so-called reverse charge) to other industries, which will also reduce the volume of VAT returns in the economy.
#The network will support artisans and farmers by substantially increasing the limit on flat-rate expenses.
#The network will strengthen the ability of citizens to decide on the targeting of their income tax by increasing the percentage for natural persons to 5%,
and at the same time cancel the possibility of legal entities to remit 2% (or limit it to 1000 euros).
Municipalities will be compensated for this measure.
until 2020
#The network will simplify the tax system and reduce income tax for all working families.
It will reduce the number of rates and exemptions and remove anomalies where, for example, a sole trader pays a higher rate of income tax than a large business.
A fundamental reduction in the complexity of tax legislation and administration will be achieved by the #Network by adopting a new, unambiguously worded income tax law after professional preparation and consultation with entrepreneurs.
At the same time, a rule will be introduced that the government must submit a detailed interpretation of the new tax rules together with the draft law to the parliament so that it is clear in advance what it will bring.
#Network will also push for income tax cuts for all working families.
This measure is described in the second state.
#The network will unite the collection of taxes and social contributions into a unified system
and will prepare the abolition of health levies, which will separate the solidarity and individual package in health care, while the solidarity package will be paid from taxes.
#The network will introduce a set of measures that will reduce red tape.
The One Stamp measure guarantees that it is possible to start a business in one day and it can be handled in one place.
With the One Office measure, we will ensure the availability of the services of the most used offices under one roof in each district.
At the same time, the #Network will merge and simplify the authorities that fundamentally affect entrepreneurs.
The Trade Register and the Commercial Register as well as the Antimonopoly Office and the Slovak Trade Inspection will be merged.
We will promote accelerated electronicization of the state administration.
If the state administration has already requested certain information from a citizen, it may not request it again.
# 5 Functioning public services
Education and health
Education
The first 100 days
#The network will return to the school councils the competence to select the director of the school or school facility again so that this selection is binding for the founders of the schools.
At the same time, we will expand the competences of school councils by other tasks, which will strengthen the voice of parents and the principles of democracy, participation and public control in the school environment.
#The network will increase parents' awareness of their rights and the rights of their children in kindergartens and primary schools.
We will summarize the legal regulations into simple information points for parents and introduce the obligation for nurseries and schools to post this information in a visible place.
We will offer parents in primary schools the opportunity to contribute to improving the performance of pupils in schools through personal initiative.
We will create a program for active parents who want to help students with homework and other activities in cooperation with teachers in the afternoon at school.
In localities with socially excluded communities, we will focus on expanding parenting skills.
We will support schools in these locations in the active involvement of parents in school projects and in extracurricular activities, in volunteer support for children in preparing for school, and through activation work and second-chance education for the role of teacher's assistants.
We will create opportunities for children from socially excluded communities and their families to implement educational programs even during the summer holidays.
#The network will increase the awareness of university students about their rights.
Together with the students, he will formulate a student bill of rights that will establish the standard of services to which they are entitled.
After the bill of rights is enshrined in the Law on Higher Education, higher education institutions will have the freedom in what solution they use to ensure the fulfillment of these rights, but a significant package of their financial resources will be tied to meeting the standards.
within two years
#The network will guarantee parents access to preschool education and expand the range of services in the field of education and care in early childhood.
We will support a diverse range of comprehensive early childhood care, education and education services, not only in kindergartens, but also through children's groups, company nurseries, community centers, etc.
As we describe in more detail in the second chapter, in the context of kindergartens, we will emphasize increasing their capacities, the quality of education and a more flexible childcare program, so that kindergartens can better adapt to the workload of parents.
#The network will change compulsory school attendance to compulsory education.
It will complete the capacity of primary schools and introduce the "5-10-15 model", which will allow children at the age of 5 to enter preparatory grades in primary schools,
extension of the primary level of education so that the 1st level also includes the 5th year of elementary school (children aged 10)
and completion of compulsory education in the 9th grade of elementary school (youth at the age of 15).
Children will be admitted to preparatory years in elementary schools after reaching the age of five, without the obligation to prove that they have attained school maturity.
The purpose of the preparatory year will be to adequately develop school maturity in children.
All children will thus be able to benefit from the preparation for the transition to regular school education, but especially children from socially excluded communities and children with disabilities.
In the last two years of primary school, we will support the development of professional and advisory services for pupils, which will be aimed at identifying their strengths and advising on choosing a suitable school and future profession.
#The network will support student-oriented education in compulsory education and the gradual transformation of the existing selective school model into a model where every child is welcomed in a regular school and receives individual support for their development.
In primary schools, every child deserves individual attention from teachers and other professionals, help with learning and encouragement.
In schools, we will start from the first day to create conditions for teachers to work more intensively with children on an individual level and help them improve.
Regardless of whether the child comes from a functioning family or from a less stimulating environment, whether it is an exceptionally gifted child, with a disability, a learning and behavioral disorder, or a "problem-free" child - we are all about each and all at the same time .
Services to equalize the chances for all children (special educator, speech therapist, assistant, appropriate modifications of the educational program and many others) must be available and eligible for all children who need them.
Funds to cover them will be tied not to the school, but to a specific child.
We will introduce practical measures to realistically fulfill the obligation of inclusive education of pupils from socially excluded communities and pupils with disabilities in regular schools and create functional tools to monitor the application of these measures.
In vocational education, we will increase the emphasis on the practical preparation of students for their future profession.
We will create effective motivational mechanisms for employers to increase the offer of internships for students.
At the same time, we will create mechanisms for the training of qualified specialists on the part of employers who will be able not only to teach pupils in a qualified manner, but also to participate in the creation of educational standards and the preparation of educational programs on behalf of employers.
We will allow students in dual education to earn an income from the first day of starting education.
#The network will fundamentally reform the principles and criteria for assessing the competence of universities and the evaluation criteria for their activities.
It will also reform the career and salary system at universities so that experts from practice and foreign experts can get into the key positions of professors and associate professors.
We will create opportunities for rewarding schools that will significantly improve the personnel quality of their employees.
#The network will also promote the creation of a special grant system for excellent teachers and scientists to teach at universities.
It will be open to employees of universities, but also to external experts and experts working abroad.
It will be a competitively distributed package of money for a period of 6 years, which will be tied to a top expert, who will be paid not only an adequate salary, but also other costs for science and building his own team.
until 2020
#The network will promote the position of the teacher as a professional with an adequate support service and open the market for textbooks and teaching materials.
In practice, this will mainly mean: Expanding teaching teams in schools
necessary psychologists, special educators, assistants, educational counselors and social workers as a standard, not an exceptional measure.
Provision of basic, regularly updated information-methodical packages for teachers with a practically usable offer of diverse methodological materials, as well as examples of good practice and contacts necessary for developing mutual cooperation or obtaining professional help.
Creation of a field professional support network for teachers, within which various experts (methodologists, didactics, special pedagogues, psychologists, mediators, etc.) will help them solve acute or long-term problems directly in the school environment, instead of in a remote counseling center
Strengthening of transparent management, teamwork and open communication in schools within all interested groups (school founders and managements, teaching teams, professional staff, pupils, parents)
and zero tolerance of mobbing, bossing, bullying and disrespectful behavior towards adults and children.
Coordination of activities aimed at the creation and consensual adoption of professional standards for the teaching profession, the teacher's code of ethics and changes in the descriptions of teaching fields of study at universities.
An increase in teachers' salaries and the introduction of the right to personal bonuses tied to specific performance.
The evaluation of teachers must correspond to the work actually performed not only in teaching, but also in the framework of other activities connected with the process of education and teamwork within the school collective.
Reducing the bureaucratic burden on teachers.
Increasing the standards by an amount intended to support the professional development of teachers and to purchase the necessary textbooks and teaching materials according to the teachers' choice.
The network proposes to increase and stabilize the education budget, namely to increase the amount of funds for education by at least 30% by 2020.
Healthcare
The first 100 days
#The network will introduce material responsibility of public officials for all levels of management in healthcare
and enforces the selection of state hospital directors and other key managers in open tenders solely on the basis of expertise
and also the creation of clear criteria for their evaluation tied not only to management, but also to the quality and satisfaction of patients and their enforcement.
#The network will ban the participation of mailbox companies with unknown owners between health insurance companies and health care providers.
At the same time, it will strengthen the competition between suppliers and introduce a clear comparison of the prices of individual items that are purchased in the healthcare sector, so that each purchase is clear whether it is overpriced or not.
Selected items will be purchased centrally.
At the same time, the #Network will enforce the publication of comprehensive information on the management of public providers in healthcare, including purchased prices and volumes.
#The network will support health workers in their long-term efforts for fairer and more dignified working conditions.
By adjusting and precisely defining the competencies of all health professionals, their appropriate powers will be advocated.
#The network will minimize the level of administrative burden on health professionals by supporting their delegation to support staff.
within two years
#The network will ensure the availability of specialists by not defining the minimum network within the entire region, but so that the patient does not have to travel more than a certain distance and wait more than a certain time.
The general health insurance company will use special payments to motivate doctors to extend office hours to a full-day regime, especially for providers who are in short supply.
This also applies to the use of purchased devices.
All payments required to access healthcare will have to be published on a central website.
#The network will promote the introduction of programs for special population groups, namely mothers with children and seniors.
It will support the development and implementation of the Mother and Child Program and the Geriatric Patient Care Program.
#The network will put into practice the DRG (Diagnoses Related Groups) system and will introduce clear rules for contracting providers with the General Health Insurance Company.
The DRG system is a classification and reimbursement system that allows hospitalization cases to be classified according to diagnoses, diagnostic and treatment procedures into groups with a similar clinical course and similar economic costs.
It evaluates the operation of hospitals, the efficiency of the use of diagnostics, treatment and its services, and accordingly allocates financial resources fairly.
Today, insurance companies pay different payments to individual hospitals for the same diagnosis.
This means that, for example, an appendectomy is paid for at a different amount in a terminal hospital than it is paid in a district hospital.
Slovakia is the only EU country that does not have a DRG system in place.
If the DRG system is to work, it must be accompanied by clear rules for the inclusion of new providers in the system.
#The network will introduce a higher level of competition in the sale of some over-the-counter drugs by removing the pharmacy monopoly on their sale, which will lead to lower prices.
Medicines would be available in more places and in more convenient opening hours.
until 2020
#The network will ensure the transition to a new philosophy, the goal of which will be to measure the quality of the provided health care, including with the contribution of an informed patient who will be motivated to take responsibility for his health.
We will support the publication of information on the management of hospitals as well as data on the quality of services provided.
The publication of waiting lists by a system that guarantees the protection of personal data will be mandatory so that the patient can be transferred to a provider with a shorter waiting period.
#The network will make health care more efficient by electronicizing the sharing of information between doctors (eHealth), which will mainly include prescribing drugs, results of laboratory and imaging examinations, sending exchange tickets, discharge reports, etc.
According to the European Commission, the electronicization of healthcare is a priority for the Slovak healthcare system.
#The network will restart the implementation of the e-Health system with funds from European funds.
At the same time, doctors must receive sufficient financial support to transfer existing medical documentation to the system.
# 6social protection
The first 100 days
The basic parameters of the 2nd pillar will be constitutionally protected.
#The Network proposes that not only the percentage of levies heading to the 2nd pillar be constitutionally protected, so that governments cannot change them at will, but also solidarity in the form of a minimum pension and the freedom to dispose of saved resources beyond the mandatory minimum.
#The network will also remove discrimination against savers, whose pensions from the first pillar are cut by the state much more than they should.
Today, people in the 2nd pillar are discriminated against because significantly more is deducted from their state pension than the amount of contributions they send to the second pillar.
#The network will eliminate this discrimination, which costs the average pensioner-cum-saver more than 30 euros per month.
within two years, the #Network will eliminate the situation where, on the one hand, there are disproportionately long waiting periods for the allocation of social services in residential facilities, and on the other hand, non-public providers of social services have limited capacity.
At the same time, no financial support and services reach the citizens in the queues.
One of the main principles that the #Network promotes is the freedom to choose between public and private service providers, which also applies to the care of dependent citizens.
#The network, in cooperation with the interested professional public, will create a new address-oriented model of financing social services, which will eliminate the differences in financing between public and non-public providers of social services
and will introduce a system of financing nursing services in social service facilities, which ensures reimbursement of all justified nursing services by health insurance companies.
We will also introduce a new model of financing the home care service, where we will allow citizens to freely decide whether to choose a form of social service residence or home care service from a public or non-public provider.
#The network will push for the creation of a central independent assessment activity that will be more economically advantageous, administratively easy and easily accessible for insured persons, persons with disabilities, applicants for the provision of social services, persons from socially excluded communities and others.
#The network, after defining the socially excluded communities in the law, determines the claimable funding for the services provided to which locations, in order to ensure the financial stability of the programs.
we propose to replace the current dysfunctional system of activation work with multi-level activation and employment support in localities.
Activating exclusions need to be significantly reformed, as work has not proven itself as a tool for returning to the labor market.
Today, they are a social benefit for which citizens do not receive relevant benefits in return, because local governments do not have the personnel capacity to manage and supervise workers.
#The network will continue to implement the former Convention on the Rights of Persons with Complete Disabilities, which the Slovak Republic ratified.
As we also mention in the Education chapter, the #Network is also interested in orienting itself in the provision of public services to the client's needs.
Therefore, for example, pupils and students at all levels should have the conditions for education in ordinary communities and collectives, where they should be provided with the necessary assistance.
until 2020
#The network will promote the strengthening of pre-school training for children from three years of age from socially disadvantaged backgrounds.
The #Network will propose the standardization of field social work and community social work, while maintaining continuity, experts will search and map the environment and situation of persons at risk of social exclusion, and if it is detected that children will not achieve a sufficient level of socialization, the #Network will push for preschool training for children from four years of age from socially disadvantaged backgrounds.
All children have the right to a stimulating environment that develops their potential and it is the duty of the state to guarantee them access to education and support them in learning.
In socially excluded communities, children have a lack of infrastructure for adequate development, so it is necessary to create special educational opportunities and motivational mechanisms for them at an early age.
We will enable them to attend various forms of preschool education, the availability of which is guaranteed by the #Network for all children from the age of 3 in the second chapter of this document.
#The network will work to create a model of functional education in schools with children from a low-stimulating environment.
In socially excluded locations, we will provide increased funding, the necessary number of assistant and auxiliary positions, special and social pedagogues, speech therapists, etc.
#The Network will propose the creation of a four-member group of experts consisting of a health assistant, a field social worker, a member of the police force and a Roma volunteer for each socially excluded community.
Working together as a team will achieve the best results in the health education program, making health care more accessible, maintaining safety and addressing other community issues such as unemployment.
#The network will also propose the standardization of field and community social work, which will increase employability.
#The network will propose a project that will ensure higher employment and housing for poor citizens and residents of socially excluded locations through the construction of family houses
and by creating sustainable jobs for all poor and socially excluded communities.
We will also introduce a related program that will allow poor residents to gradually get better housing based on merit.
The goal should be to obtain a standard rental apartment, the number of which we propose to increase in the second chapter.
#The network will advocate for the gradual reduction of the number of children in orphanages so that as many children as possible can be raised in substitute families.
Caring for children in orphanages is about twice as expensive as in the more natural environment of a foster family.
Deinstitutionalization must take place in a decentralized form and gradually.
It will be necessary to coordinate this process with the development of financial and non-financial support for surrogate families, the education of experts and current/future surrogate parents, the building of community centers where assistance in caring for children can be combined with assistance in caring for the elderly.
Regular control and contact with the surrogate family as well as accurate data and increased supervision of particularly vulnerable groups (medically disadvantaged children) is essential.
It is advisable to start deinstitutionalization after a survey of existing facilities with the aim of keeping in operation longer those that achieve good results in the indicators of care and satisfaction of children.
A specific problem in the Slovak context is the restrictive legal regulation of adoptions, which creates a situation where, despite the increasing number of applications for adoption, there is a decrease in the number of approved applications, not because of the unsuitability of the applicants, but because of strict formal criteria (necessity of biological parents' consent to adoption in most cases, disproportionately strict checks on candidates for adoption compared to DeD or NR checks) and a long waiting time.
#The network will advocate for appropriate simplification of adoptions.
#7 culture
The first 100 days
#The network will start the process of opening and making available Slovak culture and cultural heritage.
In the first phase, it will be a pilot making available entry to museums and galleries for free, with an emphasis on strengthening their educational dimension.
This will go hand in hand with the expansion of the applicability of cultural vouchers for other groups of citizens, such as senior citizens.
#The network will redirect more money to culture.
We will transfer them to the Art Fund from resources intended for the promotion of state-controlled enterprises, where they are non-transparently spent to support the personal interests of their representatives or for clientelistically determined priorities.
It will be more than 18 million. euros per year.
We will support patronage in two ways, namely through the mechanism of the so-called matching funds – the state doubles the amount contributed by the sponsor.
The second way will be to strengthen the possibility of income tax allocation.
#The network decriminalizes downloading works from the Internet for personal use.
We value and support copyright as a natural source of income for artists, when the creator gives permission to use their work for a fee.
However, we do not agree with the possibility of criminal prosecution for downloading works from the Internet for personal use, as long as it is on a small scale.
Citizens should be sanctioned under civil law for such copyright infringement.
within two years
#The network will continue the process of opening and making Slovak culture more accessible.
We will introduce a guaranteed purchase of copies of Slovak literature for schools, libraries and for international promotion.
We will provide electronic access to older literature that is not legally protected, but also to copyrighted works by purchasing copyrights.
We will also support the digitization of books and other types of cultural heritage.
We maximize the accessibility of digitized cultural heritage to the public - ideally in free online form.
These mechanisms will be able to be applied to other artistic commodities – works of art and music, architecture, and the like.
#The network will equalize the support of non-state cultural activities with activities directly supported by the state by making the grant system more flexible, introducing long-term and institutional grants and canceling additional taxes for artists and replacing them with incentive measures for artists to contribute to self-administered funds voluntarily.
#The network will push for the liberalization of the radio market and the merger of broadcasting and telecommunications regulators.
#The network will introduce clear rules for the distribution of European funds for the publicity of projects to prevent political and personal corruption of the Slovak media.
until 2020
#The network will advocate for the transformation of state cultural institutions into a special public law form similar to that for public universities and public research institutions, which will allow them multi-source financing, the participation of different levels of public power in their management and better protect them from political influences.
#The Network will improve the protection of monuments and cultural heritage by reassessing the tangible cultural heritage protection system and creating functional tools, both restrictive and motivational, to implement real functional protection.
An example can be the separation of the performance of the state administration in this area from its control - the monument inspection.
#The network will push for the cancellation of concession fees and will push for the financing of RTVS with a fixed percentage from the state budget.
#The network will also change the philosophy of the RTVS public service, placing greater emphasis on the management of cultural heritage and making it accessible to the public.
We will also make sure that other media have the opportunity to compete for the performance of some public service broadcasting tasks.
#The network will support discussion and address national minorities.
#8 justice
The first 100 days
A fundamental and immediate measure of #Sie te to improve the situation in justice will be strengthening and enforcing the responsibility of judges and prosecutors, including their material responsibility.
#The network will enforce the material responsibility of public officials so that it also applies to judges and prosecutors.
At the same time, it will strengthen the disciplinary mechanisms for justice, which will include automatic disciplinary proceedings in the event of delays in proceedings,
the possibility of the appeals court to propose disciplinary proceedings,
the distribution of the appointment of disciplinary senates between the president, the government, the NR SR and the Judicial Council.
It will also introduce new disciplinary options (such as suspension and mandatory retraining for certain types of mistakes and tougher consequences for repeated failure).
He will push for the introduction of objective indicators in the evaluation of judges.
#The network will prevent the repetition of fraudulent restructurings and the abuse of bankruptcies.
For example, the possibility of the debtor to propose a restructuring administrator will be removed, box companies will automatically be considered persons related to the debtor, and the obligation to inform creditors will be strengthened.
The #Network will end an era that can be called the Republic of Foreclosures, when the number and cost of foreclosures against ordinary people continues to grow.
It will operationalize personal bankruptcy, increase the quality and intensity of state control over executors, and emphasize the consolidation of enforcement proceedings.
At the same time, it will take steps to eliminate some of the causes of the large number of foreclosures, including stricter regulation of gambling and stricter supervision of non-bank entities, including those that operate outside the legal framework.
#Sieť will submit to the parliament an amendment to the Enforcement Order, which will extend the so-called enforcement exception to the participation of local governments in companies that operate in the areas listed in Article 4 of the Constitution of the Slovak Republic.
within two years
#The network will promote the speeding up of court decisions and the increase of their quality, especially at the first instance.
One of the most serious causes of long court proceedings in Slovakia is the huge error rate of first-instance proceedings, which appeal courts cancel by default.
The change for the better will be the result of a comprehensive program consisting of four measures:
increasing the quality of legislation (measures are listed in the first chapter);
strengthening the accountability of judges and other stakeholders for their actions;
better organization of the work of judges and their teams; specialization and education of judges.
#The network will ensure better organization of the work of judges and their teams.
Depending on the agenda and type of court, each judge should have a standard defined number of senior court officials, other court employees and the associated material and technical support.
#The network will also increase the attractiveness of the profession of a senior court official through a combination of better salary evaluation and professional content.
The experience of a senior court official will be counted as the experience of a law clerk, which will expand the possibilities for the further career direction of senior court officials.
#The network will push for the abolition of the institution of judicial waiting.
#The network will promote the specialization of judges and their better education.
The specialization of judges is a necessary condition for high-quality decisions in complex topics - today, in many cases, the same judges perform, figuratively speaking, both heart transplants and neurology.
Greater specialization requires a change in the organization of the judiciary - for example, the introduction of city courts in Bratislava and Košice instead of 9 district courts, but also the limitation of less frequent but extremely complex types of disputes to selected courts.
In the case of very complex and serious areas, the #Network will also enforce binding the judge's ability to judge to regular verification of knowledge in the given area.
#The network will push for the introduction of transparency in the prosecutor's office following the example of the courts, that is, the publication of the names and decisions of prosecutors.
Publication of decisions in a structured form with sufficient data (who issued the decision, what type of action it was, when, relevant paragraph).
until 2020
#The network will work to review, update and supplement the judge's code of ethics and introduce into law the obligation of the judge to follow this code.
The current code is too general, unknown and unenforced by the judges themselves.
The new code should be adopted after a wide discussion, especially as a challenging and concrete document that will be actively promoted to the public as well.
#The network will strengthen the independence of the individual prosecutor from interference from above and enforce the weakening of the monocratic nature of the prosecution.
He sees the improvement of the work of the prosecutor's office in public control, the responsibility of individual prosecutors for their work and greater specialization.
#The network will propose the possibility of a judicial review of the prosecutor's office's decisions on the suspension of criminal prosecution so that the only entity with this authority is not only the general prosecutor.
The prosecutor is the master of criminal proceedings before filing a lawsuit in court.
Cases from practice have shown that sometimes, in connection with local detentions, the suspension of the criminal prosecution by the prosecutor prevailed over the filing of an indictment, and thus justice before the court could not be achieved.
#The network will increase the openness of legal professions.
It will enable young people to have fair access to the performance of legal professions by reducing the mandatory minimum terms for newcomers to 3 years, but maintaining or increasing the difficulty of the final exam so that only a high-quality applicant can successfully pass it.
It will also promote greater openness of disciplinary proceedings within the mentioned professions through the mandatory participation of an external and lay element.
#9 Internal security
The first 100 days
#The network, in the interest of the good reputation and credibility of a quality police officer, will enforce systemic measures that will lead to the mandatory recording of official interventions by police officers.
#The network will strengthen the position of the police chief as the main representative of the police, who will really have his hands free in the fight against crime.
The police president cannot just be a direct subordinate of the political leadership of the Ministry of the Interior.
We will push for the police chief to be appointed by the President of the Slovak Republic after a proposal by the Government of the Slovak Republic and a public hearing in the relevant parliamentary committee.
#The network will introduce a fundamental change in the system of administrative fees.
Administrative fees are unclear in Slovakia, the citizen has no chance to orient himself in them, and the state does not help him in any way.
#The network in the field of administrative fees will bring such changes in the laws that, if the office does not comply with the legal deadlines, it is obliged to automatically and immediately return the administrative fees paid to the citizen.
In case of repeated non-compliance with deadlines without objective reasons, he should be obliged to compensate the citizen.
within two years
#The network will stabilize and increase the authority of the police, we want a strong, stable and capable police force that will not be subject to political influences.
At the same time, we will stop the constant exchange of officials even at the lower levels of management and command, which can be seen after every change of government.
The trustworthy police must not be a toy in the hands of the ruling politicians.
We want citizens to have confidence that the police act objectively, impartially and without political influence.
#The network will enforce maximum objectivity in the investigation of possible misconduct by members of the police force, the prison and judicial guard corps, and customs officials by establishing an independent general inspection of the security forces.
To create such a supervisory body, we will use the already existing personnel and material capacities of control and inspection bodies, but they will be given adequate importance and independence from political processes.
#The network will push for police officers to be used for professional actions while performing their duties.
We want more police officers fighting crime on the ground.
A police officer is a relatively expensive workforce, taking into account social security and pension claims.
Slovakia cannot afford to waste such human capacities by using them for service activities.
We see the possibility of shifting the agenda, which represents an unnecessary bureaucratic burden and often misunderstanding on the part of citizens, from the shoulders of the police.
Therefore, we will consider moving the agenda in areas such as issuing identity cards, rewriting motor vehicles, assigning registration numbers, the agenda of passports to other public administration bodies, similar to what successful examples from abroad show.
until 2020
#The network will ensure that every citizen knows his "walker," whom he can turn to with confidence.
The errand boy knows his service district - owners of shops, restaurants, schools, problem areas and interested persons.
He will visit these places regularly, communicate with the residents, and identify problems.
Based on the requirements from the schools, the walker would participate in the lecture activity in cooperation with the prevention departments.
Close interaction and assessment of the situation in the subject location together with representatives of self-governing bodies will be a matter of course.
#The network will work to improve time management and the efficiency of police work by introducing an electronic investigative file.
In the Slovak police force, the diary of the investigation file has so far been introduced only for indexing.
This means that it can be searched for the perpetrator, the investigator and the crime.
Electronic investigative file in the form known from developed EU countries - investigative actions are digitized and automatically transferred electronically between law enforcement agencies, currently the police force does not have one.
Therefore, the #Network will promote its accelerated implementation.
The electronic investigation file will improve the communication of all parties involved in the investigation process.
It also ensures minor delays in the proceedings and minimizes the possibility of information leakage to the external environment.
#The network will put into practice the principles of career growth, which will be valid for all members of the corps.
They will represent a positive motivation for police officers.
By changing the relevant laws, we will introduce a motivational service law for members of the Slovak Police Force, including a new career progression and remuneration.
Police officers must be sure that their career progression will have objective rules and will not be distorted for subjective or political reasons.
Social security for members of the police force should be a stable and predictable system that is not subject to constant changes.
The measures will lead to the stabilization of the police force and better use of the internal capacities of the police.
#The network will evaluate the existing four-tier management structure of the police force.
We will assess the usefulness and effectiveness of a multi-level management system and remove unnecessary intermediate levels in the existing structure of the police force in order to better utilize internal capacities and strengthen decision-making processes within the organizational structure.
We will promote the introduction of an evaluation system so that it does not motivate the rejection of reports from citizens, but leads to an effective way of detecting all forms of criminal activity.
#10 National Defense
The first 100 days
The #Network will promote continuity and political agreement between the main political parties in making major strategic decisions in the field of defence.
Considering the long-term nature of the implementation of the objectives of the defense policy of the Slovak Republic, which exceeds the horizon of the term of office of one government, consensus is decisive.
The support of the general public in making such decisions is also essential.
Such an approach will ensure that individual incoming governments practice transparency and a cross-party approach and continue to implement the adopted long-term defense policy goals.
#The network will develop a new defense strategy of the Slovak Republic.
It is crucial that our strategies and plans are kept up to date and harmonized with those of allies at regular intervals.
We see the solution in establishing a mechanism that will ensure the systematic submission and approval of strategic documents and modernization plans at all levels.
within two years
The #Network will strive to fulfill Slovakia's commitment to stop the decline in defense spending, to ensure their real increase in line with economic growth, and to allocate a share of GDP to defense in accordance with accepted international obligations by 2020.
At the same time, we intend to spend 20% of the total defense expenditure on the modernization of the armed forces.
For the continued transformation of the armed forces, we need sufficient resources, but also to achieve a balanced structure of defense spending.
The reform cannot take place at the expense of staffing units, adequate training and modern infrastructure.
#The network will harmonize and simplify defense laws.
The retroactivity of the laws and the worsening of the social security conditions of professional soldiers in relation to the current situation are unacceptable.
#The network will practice a new approach to defense planning that is comprehensive in nature and harmonized with NATO processes.
We see the solution in a draft law that will establish the details of defense planning binding on all relevant branches of the state.
#The network wants to revive the domestic defense industry.
We will therefore support the processing of the state strategy for the development of the Slovak defense industrial and technological base.
The presence of a viable defense industry on the territory of the state increases its defense capability.
We see the solution in reviving domestic defense research and development by ramping up domestic production of weapons and military technology, thereby creating new job opportunities for our citizens.
In order to fulfill transparency, legitimacy, economy and control, the #Network will ensure that public procurement is based exclusively on approved and financially secured defense development plans.
Public procurement in recent years has been accompanied by several cases.
Almost all major defense projects have been subject to long delays and cost overruns.
until 2020
#The Network supports Slovakia's commitments to comply with the individual and collective ability to resist an armed attack.
In accordance with Article 3 of the Washington Treaty, Slovakia will maintain and develop its individual and collective ability to resist an armed attack.
In order to fulfill the tasks of defending the state with its own forces or with allies within the framework of collective defense, it is necessary to continue to maintain and develop a single package of flexible and resource-achievable defense capabilities with a corresponding command and control system, compatible with NATO allied force structures.
The development of forces and capabilities destined for collective defense according to Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty must become the core of the further qualitative transformation of our armed forces.
#The network is aware of the need for modernization, specialization and unification of forces.
Therefore, we consider the modernization of the units of the mechanized brigade of the ground forces, including its combat support and combat security units, and the continuation of the modernization of aviation and air defense systems, to be a priority for the further development of the armed forces.
#The network will strengthen voluntary military training and improve the motivational factors for its completion.
It develops the concept of reserves and creates legislation in the context of conscription, preparation, training and use of these reserve forces.
# 11 International and European relations
The first 100 days
The Presidency of the Slovak Republic in the Council of the European Union in the second half of 2016 offers a chance for the practical anchoring of Slovakia in the institutional core of the EU.
For the #Network, the political role of the presidency is important for increasing the benefits of Slovakia's current position in the EU, as well as for the restoration of foreign policy consensus, which is the basis for the ability of a small country like Slovakia to succeed on the international stage.
Through the presidency, the Slovak Republic has a concrete opportunity to communicate the story of Slovakia in Europe, and at the same time to contribute in a tangible way to the answers to the question of what a country like Slovakia can do for a more functional and simpler EU.
Doma #Sieť will use the presidency for active communication about European topics and about Slovakia in the EU in all regions of the country, not only in Bratislava.
#The Network suggests that, based on an open debate on the problems with the withdrawal of European funds, we significantly simplify and make the EU grant management system more transparent.
The measure is elaborated in detail in the first chapter.
We will no longer have such cheap and accessible money as Eurofunds.
We must use them and in the allocated volume and meaningfully.
within two years
The Slovak Republic needs a new security strategy.
We need simple and clear documents, a concise and concise security strategy.
We need less legislation that does not address details such as the right to a company cell phone or a company car for representatives of the security sector.
At the same time, however, it must provide a realistic setting of security policy goals for which the state is able to provide adequate capacities.
We need a new law on crisis management (instead of Act No. 387/2002 Coll.) and a clear role and powers of the Security Council.
Current security threats also offer investment and development priorities.
Cyber ​​security is not only a matter of security, but also has considerable economic potential.
This area represents one of the investment priorities in the world.
Several companies operate in Slovakia and in wider Central Europe, which are among the best in the field of cyber security.
In SR and in the V4 region, there is potential for the emergence of a new cyber power.
The goal of the #Network is to start a regional cyber cluster with a strong Slovak representation.
We need a simple, functioning model of economic diplomacy oriented towards performance and benefit to people and businesses in Slovakia.
#The network will stand up for the unified management and coordination of actors of economic diplomacy at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic.
We propose to concentrate the resources and coordination of the country's economic diplomacy on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic.
#The network will support the long-term focus of economic diplomacy of the Slovak Republic on innovation centers with growth potential, such as the west coast of the USA, Asia, South America or Israel.
It is also true that economic diplomacy of the Slovak Republic will be stronger in a wider grouping of countries such as the Vyšehrad Four.
For the #Network, inspiration for regional cooperation in economic diplomacy is the Nordic countries with co-working and virtual office projects for local investors, companies and consultants - Nordic Innovation House or Silicon Vikings.
At home, we will start a policy that will attract innovation potential from abroad, especially in the field of information and digital technologies, for example from the countries of the Eastern Partnership.
An important homework task is to simplify the rules for doing business and establishing a business in Slovakia.
We will set the priorities of Slovak development aid and support the work focus of EU development aid in order to contribute to the stabilization of areas that are the source of the growing number of refugees to EU territory.
#The network will support systematic and sustainable projects with a measurable contribution to the development of third countries.
until 2020
The goal of the #Network is to move Slovakia closer to the economic core of the European Union.
Political priorities for the period up to 2020 are further integration in the field of digital and energy markets
and expanding the EU's trade opportunities.
At the same time, the aim of the #Network is to maintain clear and coherent relations between the eurozone countries and other member countries within the framework of the EU common market.
An essential priority of the Slovak Presidency of the Council of the EU will be an agreement on Great Britain's stay in the European Union, which will consolidate the existing principles of free movement of persons in the EU.
#The network will support the EU's active neighborhood policy, which will help to make transparent, stabilize and practically develop Slovakia's relations with non-member countries of the European Union.
We will advocate for the rights and freedoms of Slovak citizens living in the world so that they can fully and everywhere benefit from the benefits associated with the functioning of the Slovak Republic in the EU.
Our specific priority is to deepen the connection of the state with the citizens of the Slovak Republic abroad through the Act on the exercise of the active right to vote for our citizens outside the territory of the Slovak Republic.
Citizens of Slovakia living outside the Slovak Republic must have the opportunity to actively make decisions and participate in the administration of public affairs in Slovakia.
# 12 Energy
The first 100 days
#The Grid will push for the complete elimination of cronyism and the depoliticization of the Office for the Regulation of Network Industries and setting its agenda to its original purpose, which is to protect consumers from the monopolistic behavior of energy producers and suppliers.
First of all, #Sieť proposes to remove the agenda unrelated to the regulation of the prices of goods and services in network industries from the purview of the office and transfer them to the purview of specialized authorities (for example, the Slovak Trade Inspection).
#Sieť proposes that every unit of electricity produced from renewable energy sources (RES) in Slovakia be exempted from consumption tax, which would make such electricity "favorable" for merchants and would bring an immediate reduction in the final price of electricity for the business sector.
within two years
#The network will implement systemic measures that will lead to a reduction in the price of electricity for small and large businesses and households, mainly through targeted deregulation,
consistent reform of the RES support system,
of highly efficient combined production and
by introducing real competition.
#The network will initiate the creation of an independent expert commission working under the auspices of the NR SR, which will focus on checking the justification of the construction of the 3rd and 4th units of the Mochovce NPP, as well as the justification of the investment funds spent, the management of public finances and the application/non-application of shareholder rights by the state in managing this project.
#The network is ready to support any solution that will mean the prevention of current waste, the weakening of existing clientelism, corruption and the setting of clear control rules, even at the cost of ending the project,
, or on the other hand, a significant strengthening of the state's role in the Mochovce NPP completion project.
until 2020
#Sieť directs Slovakia towards modern European energy companies, and through increasing energy efficiency, diversification of sources and gradual deregulation of the energy market, we will ensure a significant reduction in electricity and gas prices for the citizens of Slovakia.
#The network will promote the reduction of energy poverty and, in cooperation with other departments, will start development programs to reduce the burden on socially weak population groups.
#The network will support the start-up of pilot projects in the regions of Slovakia, which will lead to savings in electricity and heat consumption.
Following the example of the Czech program "Green Savings" and many others, subsidies for household energy efficiency will be implemented in Slovakia as well.
All Slovak families will thus be able to apply for a subsidy and reduction of energy bills in family houses or apartments.
At the same time, in the interest of increasing energy efficiency, the #Network will support energy audits, alternative energy solutions and investment incentives for all public buildings, especially for public entities that do not have funds for them (schools, hospitals and offices).
Short-term returnable investments will be implemented immediately and bindingly, while we will orient the relevant operational programs of the structural funds to these priorities.
#The network will start fundamental system measures to optimize the operation of the central heat supply (CZT) so that the result is a significant reduction in heat prices for the population.
#The network will prepare legislative support for the development of electromobility in Slovakia until 2020 (energy law, construction law, environment),
and at the same time, it will set up a mechanism to support the development of a network of charging stations, or smart parking spaces in cities.
#13 Landscape protection
The first 100 days
#The network will be committed to truly fulfilling the concept of "public interest".
In the case of the environment, but also in other areas, this means re-evaluating the relationship between the citizen and the state - governing by the principle of service to the citizen.
What is the citizen's interest cannot be decided by an official, but by the citizen.
However, the state has the right to intervene if the interest of other groups of citizens affected by the measure in question is threatened, according to the principle of sustainability, which means the administration of the state, which will ensure that future generations can live here in conditions no worse than today's ones.
The second is the precautionary principle, which commands caution in promoting potentially devastating technologies.
#The network will turn the Ministry of the Environment of the Slovak Republic into a functional and open organization.
It will abolish political nominations in the department, with the exception of the highest posts, which are directly filled by the government.
We will ensure resistance to the exchange of political representations by adopting the service law, which is described in detail in the first chapter.
Today, the Ministry of the Environment is an organization serving interest groups more than citizens and nature.
It is underfunded and not serving its purpose.
In order to be able to effectively prevent damage to the environment, the Ministry of the Environment of the Slovak Republic will strengthen the Slovak Environmental Inspection and State Nature Protection financially, in terms of personnel and competence.
We will transform the ministry into a modern institution whose staff will operate more on the ground and will use modern technologies such as GPS and crowdsourcing applications.
We will enforce a new, more favorable attitude of the Ministry towards non-governmental organizations, municipalities and the public.
They must be partners, not enemies of the ministry.
We will establish joint negotiations with important non-governmental organizations and municipalities 6 times a year.
within two years
#The network will advocate for the revision of the environmental impact assessment (EIA) rules so that there is no room for their misinterpretation.
At the same time, we will introduce a transparent selection of the company that grants (partial) assessments so that independence is guaranteed - so that the assessments are not financed by the companies themselves that apply for the permit.
The #Network will adopt the new mining law and will rigorously enforce its compliance as well as compliance with administrative procedures.
The current mining law is a legacy of communism and is built on a different philosophy than that required by a democratic environment with a civil society.
The law will enable real public participation in decision-making processes about their environment, while the prevailing opinions of the public will be respected.
Through the spatial planning process, we will ensure that the local government and citizens have the right of veto when changing the use of land.
It will be guaranteed that the public will be informed by the state administration authorities about the planned intentions sufficiently in advance and to the extent according to the public's requirements, including about other priorities for the development of the territory according to the valid spatial planning documentation.
In the law, we will also review the structure and way of functioning of the mining authorities (Main Mining Authority and District Mining Authorities).
#The network will establish a true division of mining costs and revenues between the company and the entrepreneurs, so that there are no economic losses.
We will prepare a regulation with binding control mechanisms, according to which the miner during mining will be obliged to contribute to a special publicly auditable fund for securing and liquidating mining works and for recultivation of the consequences of mining activity.
Residents must not bear the consequences of mining on their environment and property value.
Therefore, we will also push through the reform of mining fees.
We will introduce the use of the so-called differential mining rent, which is a common solution in developed countries.
When determining the fee rate, this would be based, for example, on from the current world prices of the mineral raw material and from the costs associated with the exploitation of the mineral raw material.
In these costs, it is also necessary to include the necessary costs of health care, increased as a result of the negative effects of mineral extraction on the health of the affected residents and on the environment.
Also thanks to the current system of low mining fees, foreign development companies and shell companies, which are primarily interested in selling mining licenses - mining rights to potential interested parties, show an increased interest in obtaining rights to extract mineral deposits in the territory of the Slovak Republic.
They subsequently start arbitrations when mining is not permitted, so we will push for a better definition of mining licenses, which are not a guarantee for the start of mining.
#The network will enforce the valuation of mineral deposits and reassess the raw material potential, especially in large-scale and protected areas of nature (national parks, PLA) and according to the Monument Fund.
The assessments of the deposits will serve as a basis for the decision-making process in the optimal use of land and the reduction of negative impacts on the landscape.
Within the framework of regional policy, the spatial limits of the extraction of mineral deposits in territorial plans must respect the carrying capacity of the territory.
#The network will push for, instead of "adequate" replacement planting of cut down greenery, the law specifies that the sum of the perimeters of the tree trunks planted must be the sum of the perimeters of the cut down trees.
We will also introduce the obligation to accept the negative opinion of the professional organization - the State Nature Conservancy, which today only has an advisory vote.
Woodlands in cities are crucial for the quality of life of citizens, as they provide shade, purify the air and reduce the temperature in the summer months.
In the suburban environment, they fulfill a necessary recreational function.
Today, however, we can talk about the epidemic of deforestation in built-up areas, because today they are economically profitable for investors-builders.
#The network will enforce a law that defines an animal as a living being but subject to property rights.
We promise from this an overall improvement in the living conditions of animals, including their protection from abuse or improvement of the living situation of farm animals.
The law will also regulate property relations in cases of stray, abandoned and captured animals.
To improve the situation in regions where there are large numbers of stray dogs and cats, we will expand and financially support the castration programs already in operation, which today are financed by voluntary contributions from the public.
The #Network will review the permitting of small hydropower plants and the allocated licenses for their construction, and then draw out the personnel and systemic consequences of non-transparent decision-making in their allocation from the past.
An open public discussion with the participation of experts will be ensured on the construction of each power plant, in which local residents will have a decisive say.
Small hydropower plants cause a decrease in the flow of water in the river, deterioration of the living conditions of fish and other aquatic organisms.
They separate fish populations and block their migration routes.
They can also negatively affect ecosystems and make water tourism impossible.
At the same time, they could be a relatively clean source of energy if they were incorporated into the environment sensibly and with the intention of eliminating negative impacts.
until 2020
#The network will enforce the processing of the new water policy of the Slovak Republic in such a way that it can effectively prevent floods.
The new water policy for Slovakia will be based on the principles of the common EU water policy, the latest scientific knowledge and open cooperation;
we will ensure processing in a participatory manner, with the involvement of municipalities, experts, non-governmental organizations and the public.
We will advocate for the diversification of anti-flood measures, including the expansion of inter-dam spaces and the program for the construction of small water retention dams made of natural materials, which are an important partial solution to anti-flood protection.
The #Network will also launch a program to restore fragmented agricultural land that can effectively prevent flooding by better retaining water in the land.
Landscape elements, such as anti-erosion borders, wetlands, floodplain forests, alleys, windbreaks or draws, are also a space for animals and prevent soil weathering.
This effort must also be respected by the subsidy schemes for farmers, which today financially encourage farmers to cultivate uninterrupted agricultural areas.
#The network proposes to base the perception of the management of natural areas and economic forest and their subsequent financing on a new principle: on the so-called ecosystem services.
These are environmental value additions such as carbon sequestration, drinking water production, water retention capacity, providing opportunities for recreation and more.
The new funding will ensure, among other things, better development of forest care programs.
#The network will create conditions for reducing air pollution.
It is inadmissible for long-term pollution limits to be exceeded in some cities in Slovakia.
The rules must be set so that the government supports investments in green and cleaner technologies in such a way that all polluters are sufficiently motivated to use the best available green technologies,
and at the same time, effective legislation must be adopted to enforce compliance with the polluter pays principle.
We will also introduce into the legislation the protection of residents against excessive odors, which are currently not limited.
#The network will support the introduction of backup plastic bottles.
In this way, we will mainly achieve the repeated use of secondary raw materials, which take too long to decompose, thereby reducing further pollution of nature.
We plan to pay the initial investment for the establishment of the recycling infrastructure from European funds.
The back-up capability of PET bottles will ensure that already cleaned black landfills will not be restored to their original extent.
